Agronomy
ag.purdue.edu/Agry
AY-368-W
Soil Sampling Guidelines
Soil testing is an integral part of a soil Sample Collection
fertility management program. Effective and Handling
Author: Jason P. Ackerson,
soil testing provides information on
Proper soil sample collection relies on
Assistant Professor
the fertility status of soils within a field
three principles:
of Agronomy
that can be used for making fertilizer
or lime application recommendations, 1. Organization: having an orderly
monitoring changes in soil fertility over system for soil sample collection
time and even identifying and targeting and handling simplifies sample
low fertility soils within larger fields. collection and minimizes the chance
Informative soil sampling can improve of human errors such as mislabeling
on-farm nutrient efficiency, leading or misplacing soil samples.
to increased return on investment
2. Consistency: collecting each sample
for fertilizer and lime application and
in a uniform manner between years
decreased risk of off-site nutrient
and within the course of a sampling
movement.
event will greatly improve the quality
Regardless of the goal, reliable soil and reliability of your results. This
testing starts with proper soil sampling. means taking samples in the same
In this article, we will outline the basic manner for each sample.
principles of agronomic soil sampling,
3. Simplicity: following simple
covering the basic principles of soil
procedures will help ensure sample
sample collection and providing
collection is consistent and easily
guidelines for establishing an effective
organized.
soil sampling and testing program.AY-368-W Soil Sampling Guidelines
Samples and subsamples 4. Insert the soil probe to the desired depth. (See Table
Soils can be highly variable, even over short distances. 1 for details on sample depths.) Take care to ensure
Because of this variability, it is often insufficient to the probe is inserted vertically into the soil and not
collect soil at just one location. Instead, it is preferable tilted to the side. Remove the probe and transfer the
to collect so-called composite samples. Composite soil core from the probe into a bucket (Fig. 1).
samples are a mixture of individual samples, or
subsamples, generally collected from multiple locations
and mixed together to form a single composite
sample. By combining multiple subsamples into a
single composite sample, we can minimize the effects
of soil variability by averaging the soil properties over
larger areas. Composite samples are less sensitive to
unusually high or low soil test values that might occur
due to concentrated fertilizer applications (e.g. banded
applications) or natural soil variation.
Sample collection
Before collecting soil samples, you will need to gather
certain materials and tools:
• A soil probe
• A clean plastic bucket
• A trowel
• Permanent markers Figure 1. Collecting a soil sample with a soil probe. Insert the probe
vertically into the soil and remove the soil core.
• Sample bags. Many soil testing laboratories will
provide wax-lined sample bags. In lieu of laboratory-
provided bags, consider using paper bags or zip-top 5. Move to a new location and repeat Steps 3 and 4.
bags. The distance between locations where you collect
subsamples will vary depending on the sampling
• Clipboard and paper or field notebook
strategies you are employing. (See the Sampling
• GPS-enabled smartphone or handheld gps unit locations and strategies section for more info.) As
(optional) a general guideline, the larger the area of land you
are sampling, the more distance you need between
To collect a composite sample use the following
sampling locations. As a rough guideline, sampling
procedure:
locations should be separated by a minimum of
1. Before arriving to the field, determine the number 20-30 feet. If employing a zone-based or grid-based
and approximate location of soil samples. (See soil sampling program, it is often worthwhile to
the Sampling locations and strategies section for select the location of soil samples prior to arriving in
details.) the field for sampling. These preidentified points can
be loaded onto a GPS-enabled device and the GPS
2. Once the appropriate materials have been collected,
can be used to direct you to the sampling location.
travel to the first sampling location. If you’d like,
you may record the location with a GPS or GPS 6. Continue this process of sample collection at new
application on your smartphone. This information locations until you have collected a sufficient
can be useful later for tracking where samples have number of samples. Typically, a composite sample
been collected. You may find it helpful to return should be comprised of between 10 and 20
to the same sampling locations in subsequent subsamples. The more subsamples you add into a
sampling events. composite, the more reliable a sample becomes.
3. At the sample location, remove any crop residue
from the soil surface.
2AY-368-W Soil Sampling Guidelines
7. Using the trowel, thoroughly mix the soil in the Soil testing laboratories
bucket until you have a homogeneous mixture. Soil testing is available for a nominal fee through
several specialized laboratories. Each laboratory will
8. Place 1-2 cups of the mixture into a sample bag.
have specific instructions for how to ship and label
Using permanent marker, label the bag with a
samples. To ensure the laboratory provides accurate
unique name. Names should contain identifiers
and timely results, be careful to follow any laboratory-
to the field and sample number. For example,
specific instructions. For details on laboratory-specific
“Smith-Field1-1” is a good label that identifies the
instructions, contact your chosen soil testing service.
farm (Smith Farm), field (Field 1) and the sample
number (1). While most commercial laboratories provide quality,
reliable testing services, there can be differences in
methodology and results between laboratories. For
Table 1. Sample depth guidelines
this reason, it is often desirable to use the same soil-
Tillage System Sample depth testing laboratory every year. This will ensure that any
observed change in soil-test results from year to year
Conservation tillage (Less Take separate samples:
are attributable to true changes in soil fertility status
than 50% of crop residue
incorporation) • 0-4 inches for pH/liming and not due to deviations in testing practices between
recommendations different laboratories.
• 0-8 inches for fertility analysis
Sampling locations and strategies
Conventional tillage 0-8 inches for pH/liming recommendations
(Greater than 50% of crop and fertility analysis Determining where to take soil samples depends
residue incorporation) largely on the management strategy you employ
on your farm. These management strategies can
be broken down into two types: whole-field and
spatially explicit (Fig. 2). In a whole-field management
Sample Handling
the field is managed as one unit. When fertilizer is
After collecting a composite sample, it is important
applied in a whole-field approach, one fertilizer rate is
to properly store samples to prevent contamination.
applied uniformly across the entire field. Whole-field
Typically, most laboratories prefer to prepare samples
management is simple to implement and does not
in their lab. This means that you can often send
require any special equipment or data handling.
samples directly to the laboratory without doing
any processing yourself. Some laboratories require In spatially explicit management, the field is broken
samples to be submitted in specific sample bags or into smaller sections, and each section is managed
containers. Check with your chosen laboratory for individually. Spatially explicit management can identify
specific information on its requirements for handling areas of the field with specific fertilizer of liming needs
and packaging samples. and provides a map of a field’s nutrient and liming
requirements. Spatially explicit management is an
If you are not sending samples directly to the
essential part of precision agriculture. In spatially
laboratory, consider storing samples in the refrigerator
explicit management, variable-rate technology can
or freezer to minimize the chance of mold forming in
be used to alter fertilizer and lime applications so that
the sample bag.
each zone receives a targeted, zone-specific fertilizer or
If the soil is excessively wet or you cannot store lime application.
samples in a refrigerator/freezer, allow the samples
to air dry slightly by spreading the soil in a thin layer
on a flat surface like a table. You can put down some
paper such as used newspaper to protect the surface
from getting dirty. Never dry a sample in an oven or
microwave; excessive heat can damage the sample and
alter laboratory results.
3AY-368-W Soil Sampling Guidelines
Figure 2. Whole-field management (Fig. 2a) and spatially explicit management (Fig. 2b).
Ultimately, the decision between whole-field and
spatially explicit management will depend on the
specific goals and constraints of each operation.
Whole-field management is simple to implement
but risks over- or under-fertilizing some areas of the
field. Under application of fertilizer and lime can lead
to poor yield while overapplication leads to wasted
material and can cause environmental damage.
Conversely, spatially explicit management can be
more difficult to implement but the spatial information
can be used to minimize the risk of over- and under-
application of fertilizer and lime.
Soil sampling for whole-field management
Figure 3. An example of zig-zag sampling pattern for whole field
The goal of soil sampling for whole-field management
sampling. Subsamples are collected by traveling in a zig-zag pattern
is to get a sample representative of the typical soil in
collecting subsamples at each locations indicated by black dots.
the field. To do this, subsamples are distributed across
Background lines represent the various soil types in the field. Ideally, zig-
large areas to ensure the entire field is represented. To
zag sampling samples each soil type equally.
achieve this, collect composite samples in a zig-zag
pattern (Fig. 3). Each composite sample should consist
of 10 to 20 subsamples spread evenly across a field. Soil sampling for spatially
Collect at least one composite per 20 acres.
explicit management
There are two main methods for soil sampling in
spatially explicit management — zone-based sampling
and grid sampling. With each method, soil samples
are collected from predefined areas in a field. By
correlating the soil test results with the area of the
4AY-368-W Soil Sampling Guidelines
field where samples were collected, you can generate sampling has several disadvantages when compared
a map of soil fertility patterns in the field. With both to zone-based sampling.
methods, the smaller the predefined region (i.e., zone
The first disadvantage of grid sampling is an increased
or grid cell), the more detailed the resulting map. Each
risk of bias. For example, if a majority of grid samples
method is described in more detail below.
lie on a particular soil type, the grid sample may
underrepresent the true variability in a field (Fig. 5).
Zone-based sampling
In zone-based strategies, the goal is to collect samples
that represent the average soil within each zone. Zones
are typically developed based on unique soil types or
from patterns in yield maps. The key aspect of each
zone is that zones represent areas of homogeneous
or uniform soil conditions. Typically, the more variable
the soil, the smaller the zones need to be in order to
accurately map soil fertility patterns. In most cases,
zones are between 2 and 10 acres in size.
For zone sampling, collect a composite sample from
each zone (Fig 4). Larger zones require more samples
than smaller zones. As a rule of thumb, collect two
subsamples per acre in a zone. Regardless of zone
size, a minimum of five subsamples per zone should
be collected. Subsamples should be located randomly
within a zone.
Figure 4. An example of zone-based soil sampling. In this example,
The real value of zone-based sampling is that zone-
different management zones are represented by different colors.
based data can be used to create a map of soil
Subsamples are collected and composited for each zone. Subsamples are
fertility and pH within a field. This map can show
collected for the orange-colored zone at each location denoted by black
areas of particularly high or low fertility and can be dots. Each of these samples will be mixed into a single composite sample.
used to develop precision, variable-rate fertilizer and
lime applications. Because zone-based samples are
ultimately used to generate a map, it is especially
important that samples be labeled with the correct
zone and that the location of each sample or zone is
recorded. This will ensure that laboratory results from
each soil sample can be correctly correlated with the
appropriate location in the field.
Grid sampling
Many producers and farm service provides implement
soil sampling on a grid-based system. In a grid system,
soil samples are taken at locations spaced in a uniform
pattern. Typical grid sizes range from 1 to 5 acres, with
smaller grids (i.e., 2.5 acres or less) providing the best
results. For a one-acre grid cell, collect at least five
subsamples. For grid cells between 2.5 and 5 acres,
collect between 8 and 10 subsamples. Figure 5. An example of grid-based soil sampling with sampling points
(dots) located on an evenly distributed grid. This system can lead to bias.
Grids are attractive because they are easy to
In this example, the orange zone is sampled in 30% of the grid points
implement and provide improved spatial information
(white points) but the orange zone only represents 22% of the total field.
over whole-field soil sampling. However, grid-sampling In this case, the resulting soil sample is highly biased to the soil conditions
does not utilize or account for underlying variation in represented by the orange zone.
management zones or soil types. Subsequently, grid
5AY-368-W Soil Sampling Guidelines
Grid sampling can also be inefficient. Because grids Sample timing
do not target areas of known variation in a field, more The most convenient time to collect soil samples is
samples are needed to cover the complete range when there is no standing crop in the field (i.e. in the
of soil types and variability. While grid sampling is spring prior to planting or in the fall after harvest).
preferred to whole-field sampling, it is inferior to the Both sample collection times can be useful for a given
more informative zone-based sampling. management program. When selecting a sample
collection time consider the following points:
Areas to avoid
• Schedule soil sampling and testing prior to
Regardless of soil sampling strategy, when collecting application of fertilizers or lime
samples in the field or identifying soil-sampling
• Collect samples early enough to provide the
locations, there are several areas you may wish to
laboratory sufficient time to return the data
avoid. These problem areas (Table 2) are areas in
the field where, due to some disturbance of natural • Keep sample collection timing consistent to avoid
variation, the soil may not be representative of the year-to-year variability. For example, if implementing
rest of the soil in a field or zone. If your soil sampling a spring sampling one year, do not adopt fall
point lies within or near one of these problem areas, sampling for the next year of sampling.
consider relocating the sample point to a new location.
In most soils, try to sample fields once every four years.
If problem areas occupy substantial portions of a field
This should provide sufficient data on changes in soil
(i.e. larger than 5-10 acres) consider sampling each
fertility. An exception to this guideline is for sandy soils
problem area as a unique zone.
or highly managed soils (e.g., irrigated fields, silage or
hayfields, etc.). In these circumstances, soil fertility can
Table 2. Areas to avoid when collecting soil samples change rapidly and these fields should be sampled
once every two years.
Examples of Problem Areas
• End-rows or areas of heavy equipment traffic
Conclusions
• Wet spots or depressions
Soil sampling and testing can be highly informative.
• Highly eroded areas
Information from a well-conducted soil-sampling
• Locations of former farmsteads or animal enclosures event can be useful in monitoring changes in soil
• Locations within 100 ft. of roads fertility, developing fertilizer recommendations, and
• Areas where lime is stored before application improving on-farm nutrient efficiency. Regardless
of the particular soil-sampling program you employ,
soil sampling using a consistent, well-conducted, and
organized approach will lead to the most usable and
informative soil test results.
Find out more at
purdue.edu/extension
THE EDUCATION STORE
edustore.purdue.edu
It is the policy of the Purdue University Cooperative Extension Service that all persons have equal opportunity and access to its educational programs, services, activities, and facilities without regard to race, religion, color, sex, November 2018
age, national origin or ancestry, marital status, parental status, sexual orientation, disability or status as a veteran. Purdue University is an Affirmative Action institution. This material may be available in alternative formats.