Soil Test Interpretation Guide
D.A. Horneck, D.M. Sullivan, J.S. Owen, and J.M. Hart
EC 1478 • Revised July 2011
R
egular soil testing is an important element in
Contents
nutrient management. You can use soil tests as
Nitrogen (N) ........................................................................2
a diagnostic tool or to identify trends through
Phosphorus (P) ...................................................................3
time. To obtain meaningful test results, you must
Cations (K, Ca, and Mg) ....................................................4
sample soil correctly, at the same time each year,
Sulfate-sulfur (SO -S) ........................................................5
and you must maintain records. 4
Micronutrients (B, Zn, Cu, Mn, Fe, and Mo) .................5
For more information, see the following in
Chloride (Cl–) .......................................................................7
the OSU Extension Catalog (http://extension.
pH, lime requirement (LR) ...............................................7
oregonstate.edu/catalog/): Soil Sampling for
Home Gardens and Small Acreages (EC 628); Sodium (Na) ........................................................................9
Monitoring Soil Nutrients Using a Management Soluble salts .......................................................................9
Unit Approach (PNW 570); Monitoring Soil Organic matter or soil carbon ........................................9
Nutrients in Dryland Systems Using Management
Cation exchange capacity (CEC) ..................................10
Units (EM 8920).
For more information .....................................................12
Soil testing laboratory methods vary, which may
influence results and sufficiency ranges. Therefore,
the sufficiency ranges in this publication are accurate Table 1. Plant-available nutrient forms.
only for the test methods listed.
Nutrient Form used by plant
Soil tests are used to measure soil nutrients that
are expected to become plant-available. They do Cations (+):
not measure the total amounts of nutrients in soil. Nitrogen NH+
4
Measurements of total nutrient content are not useful Potassium K+
indicators of sufficiency for plant growth, because Calcium Ca2+
only a small portion of the nutrients are plant-
Magnesium Mg2+
available. Roots take up plant-available nutrients
Manganese Mn2+
as positively or negatively charged ions from the
Copper Cu2+
soil (table 1).
Zinc Zn2+
Soil test results (see figure 1) can be viewed in
three categories: (1) low or yes, a fertilizer addition Anions (–):
will likely increase growth and yield; (2) high or no, Nitrogen NO–
3
a fertilizer addition will not likely increase growth or Phosphorus HPO– and HPO2–
2 4 4
yield; and (3) intermediate or maybe, a fertilizer addi- Sulfur SO2–
4
tion may increase growth or yield. Categorization of
Boron HBO and HBO–
3 3 2 3
soil test results into “yes,” “no,” and “maybe” assists
Molybdenum HMoO– and MoO2–
understanding the limits and benefits of using soil 4 4
Chloride Cl–
test results for making nutrient recommendations.Most soil test values do not vary greatly from
year to year. However, some soil and environmental
conditions cause fluctuations in measurements such as
pH and nitrate-nitrogen. Drastic changes in test values
year to year may indicate an unrepresentative soil
sample or a laboratory error. When in doubt, submit
a new sample or ask the lab to repeat the analysis.
Quality control programs for agricultural soil test-
ing laboratories include North American Proficiency
Testing (NAPT, http://www.naptprogram.org). This
program is overseen by the Soil Science Society of
America and is designed to promote quality, repro-
Figure 1. Soil test value vs. probability of crop yield
ducible soil testing methods.
response to nutrient addition. Crop yield increase
This publication provides general guidelines for
due to nutrient addition is likely at low soil test
interpreting soil test results. Guidelines for specific
values and unlikely at high soil test values. (Chart ©
Oregon State University. Prepared by Dan M. Sullivan.) crops are available in many other publications. If a
nutrient management/fertilizer guide for the crop in
Differing fertilizer recommendation philoso- which you are interested is available, use it instead
phies can provide multiple recommendations from of the general information in this guide. Nutrient
the same soil test results. For example, nutri- management/fertilizer guides for Christmas trees,
ent application recommendations of land-grant wheat, sweet corn, silage or field corn, peppermint,
university Extension services in the western United blueberries, caneberries, several grasses grown for
States are based on the philosophy that nutrients seed, carrots grown for seed, cranberries, hops,
should only be applied when an economic yield pastures, tree fruits and nuts, alfalfa, and onions are
increase is likely. In contrast, another philosophy for available from OSU and PNW Extension Publishing
nutrient application is soil test level maintenance, through the OSU Extension Catalog (http://
commonly used in the midwestern United States. extension.oregonstate.edu/catalog/). For potato nutri-
Soil test level maintenance is accomplished by fertil- ent management recommendations in Oregon, use
izing nutrients removed by crop harvest. Nutrients Washington State University’s Nutrient Management
are applied even though the soil test level for these Guide: Central Washington Irrigated Potatoes
nutrients may be sufficient. (EB1882, http://potatoes.wsu.edu/research/images/
Nutrient concentrations vary with soil depth, nutrient-central-wa.pdf.)
which affects soil test results. To determine the proper
sampling depth, you must consider the purpose of Nitrogen (N)
the soil test. To estimate fertilizer requirement prior
Plant-available nitrogen (nitrate and
to planting, sample soil to the depth where most root
ammonium)
activity will occur, usually a depth of 6 to 12 inches.
The plant-available forms of nitrogen are
Shallow sampling, 2 to 3 inches, is sometimes used
ammonium-N (NH -N) and nitrate-N (NO -N).
to evaluate fertilizer need in perennial crops where
4 3
The abbreviation NH -N means nitrogen in the
fertilizers have repeatedly been applied to the soil
4
ammonium form, and NO -N means nitrogen in
surface. A combination of sampling depths may be
3
the nitrate form. Soil concentrations of NO -N and
necessary to diagnose problems in orchards.
3
NH -N depend on biological activity and therefore
For more information, see the following in the OSU 4
fluctuate with changes in conditions such as tem-
Extension Catalog (http://extension.oregonstate.
edu/catalog/): Evaluating Soil Nutrients and pH perature and moisture. Nitrate is easily leached
by Depth in Situation of Limited or No Tillage in from the soil with high rainfall or excessive irriga-
Western Oregon (EM 9014). tion. Soil tests can determine NO -N and NH -N
3 4
2concentrations at the time of sampling but do not For more information, see the following in the OSU
reflect future conditions. Extension Catalog (http://extension.oregonstate.
edu/catalog/): Silage Corn Production Nutrient
The nitrogen mineralization test estimates sea-
Management Guide (Western Oregon) (EM
sonal N supply from a sample collected for wheat
8978); Sweet Corn Nutrient Management Guide
during late January. This test is only used for soft
(Western Oregon) (EM 9010).
white winter wheat production in western Oregon.
Post-harvest soil nitrate testing can be used in
For more information, see the following in
some cropping systems to determine whether N
the OSU Extension Catalog (http://extension.
supplied from all sources (fertilizer, irrigation water,
oregonstate.edu/catalog/): Using the Nitrogen
organic amendments) was excessive. Interpretation
Mineralization Soil Test to Predict Spring
Fertilizer N Rate for Soft White Winter Wheat of post-harvest soil nitrate analyses is crop specific.
Grown in Western Oregon (EM 9020). If post-harvest nitrate levels are consistently high,
reduce fertilizer N inputs in future growing seasons.
Failure to account for NO -N in the soil or from
3
irrigation water can lead to over-application of For more information, see the following in the OSU
nitrogen fertilizers. Proper irrigation increases N use Extension Catalog (http://extension.oregonstate.
edu/catalog/): Post-harvest Soil Nitrate Testing for
efficiency and reduces nitrate leaching.
Manured Cropping Systems West of the Cascade
Keep samples for N analysis cool and deliver
Mountain Range (EM 8832).
them to the laboratory the day they are collected or
send them using next-day delivery. If sample results Nitrate-nitrogen (NO -N)—East of the
3
are not needed immediately, samples can be frozen Cascade Mountain Range
and shipped later. In arid regions, soil nitrate is evaluated by mea-
Ammonium-nitrogen (NH -N) suring NO -N, usually in one-foot depth increments,
3
4
to a depth of 2 to 5 feet. The nitrogen measured with
Ammonium-nitrogen usually does not accu-
this test is used to determine the N fertilizer applica-
mulate in the soil, as soil temperature and moisture
tion rate. Consult the nutrient management guide for
conditions suitable for plant growth also are ideal
an individual crop to determine sampling depth and
for conversion of NH -N to NO -N. Ammonium-
4 3 method for crediting soil nitrate-N. If test results are
nitrogen concentrations of 2–10 ppm are typical.
reported in ppm, convert to lb/acre using table 13.
Soil NH -N levels above 10 ppm may occur in
4
cold or extremely wet soils, when the soil contains Total nitrogen
fertilizer from a recent application when soil pH is Total nitrogen analysis measures N in all
very high or low, and when soluble salts (measured organic and inorganic forms. Total nitrogen does
by electrical conductivity) are high. not indicate plant-available N and is not the sum of
Nitrate-nitrogen (NO -N)—West of the NH -N + NO -N. Total N is not used for fertilizer
4 3
3
Cascade Mountain Range recommendations.
A typical agricultural soil in the Willamette Valley
Nitrate-N is mobile in H O and is a difficult test
2 contains about 0.10 to 0.15 percent N, or approxi-
to interpret in western Oregon. Nitrate moves with
mately 5,000 lb N/acre in the surface foot. Only 1
the water when rainfall exceeds evaporation, usu-
to 4 percent of this total N becomes plant-available
ally November through April. Consequently, nitrate
(converts via microbial activity from organic form
remaining in the soil after harvest can leach during
to inorganic form) during a growing season. East of
winter rains, contaminating surface and ground-
the Cascade Mountain Range, soils usually have half
water. Situations for which nitrate-N can be used
or less this amount of total N.
for management decisions are limited. They must be
selected carefully to match crop growth and likeli-
Phosphorus (P)
hood of sufficient nitrate to reduce fertilizer need. For
example, midseason measurement of soil nitrate is
Phosphorus fertilizer recommendations are
used for silage and sweet corn production.
based on a documented relationship between crop
3yield and extractable soil test phosphorus. Historical Cations: potassium, calcium, and
soil test calibration data in Oregon have been magnesium
developed in relation to two specific phosphorus
Of the three primary cations (potassium, calcium,
extractions methods: the Bray P1 test and the Olsen
and magnesium), potassium requires the most man-
or sodium bicarbonate test (table 2). The Bray P1
agement attention. Few crops have increased growth
extraction method is used for soils west of the
or yield from calcium and magnesium additions in
Cascade Mountain Range, and the Olsen sodium
the Pacific Northwest.
bicarbonate (NaHCO ) extraction method is used
3 The soil test ranges in tables 3 and 4 are for
for soils east of the Cascade Mountain Range. Soil
the ammonium acetate or the sodium bicarbonate
testing laboratories also use several other extrac-
(NaHCO ) extraction method.
tion methods. For interpretation of results from 3
Potassium (K)
other extraction methods, contact the laboratory
that performed the analysis. Soil test P extraction Excessive soil potassium levels can result in
methods other than Bray P1 and Olsen often have elevated K levels in grass forage crops, which may
little or no field calibration studies performed to be detrimental to animal health. Conversely, very low
document their utility in Oregon. soil test K levels can reduce plant growth. K applica-
Phosphorus soil tests are an index of P availabil- tions in table 3 are applied as a broadcast application.
ity (low, medium, high, excess). When interpreting
Table 3. Extractable potassium (K) soil test categories
a P soil test, you must be aware of previous P
and suggested fertilizer rate recommendations.
management practices. Phosphorus is relatively
immobile in soil. If phosphorus has been applied Extractable or soil test K Recommendation (lb KO/acre)
2
in a fertilizer band, concentrations of P may persist Low <150 ppm* 100–300
where the band was placed, making interpretation <0.4 meq/100 g soil
of soil test data difficult.
Medium 150–250 ppm 60–250
The phosphorus application rate necessary
0.4–0.6 meq/100 g soil
to correct P deficiencies varies depending on soil
High 250–800 ppm 0
properties and crop grown. Phosphorus availability
0.6–2.0 meq/100 g soil
decreases in cool, wet soils. In many situations,
Excessive >800 ppm 0†
banded phosphorus applications are more effective
>2.0 meq/100 g soil
than broadcast applications, especially when soil test
* For ammonium acetate or sodium bicarbonate extraction method.
P values are low.
† When extractable K is excessive, determine soil and irrigation water electrical
Phosphorus applications generally are not rec-
conductivity.
ommended when test results are high or excessive.
High soil phosphorus combined with P movement Calcium (Ca)
from soil into surface waters can cause excessive Calcium deficiencies usually are found only
growth of vegetation, damaging aquatic ecosystems. on very acidic soils. They can be corrected by lim-
ing with calcium carbonate (CaCO ). Calcium is
3
rarely deficient when soil pH is adequate. Calcium
Table 2. Phosphorus (P) soil test categories and
suggested fertilizer rate recommendations. deficiency can occur at otherwise adequate soil pH
values in serpentine soil (high Mg). These soils are
West of Cascades East of Cascades found in the Siskiyou Mountains and other parts of
Recommendation
Bray P1 test P Olsen test P
(lb PO/acre) southwest Oregon.
(ppm) (ppm) 2 5
Magnesium (Mg)
Low <20 <10 0–300
Magnesium deficiencies on acidic soils can be
Medium 20–40 10–25 0–200
corrected by liming with dolomitic lime (calcium-
High 40–100 25–50 0–30
magnesium carbonate [CaCO -MgCO ]). If the soil
3 3
Excessive >100 >50 0
pH is sufficient, Mg can be supplied with Epsom
4salts (MgSO ) or potassium-magnesium sulfate Soil testing for micronutrients other than boron
4
(K SO ·2MgSO ). Excess magnesium can occur on and zinc is recommended only when a deficiency is
2 4 4
serpentine soils in southwest Oregon. Agricultural suspected. If you suspect a micronutrient deficiency,
production on serpentine soil requires management plant tissue testing may be a better diagnostic tool
not addressed in this publication. than soil testing. Soil testing will help determine
what rate to apply.
Table 4. Extractable magnesium (Mg) soil test categories
Boron (B)
and suggested fertilizer rate recommendations.
Crops such as alfalfa, table beets, brassica
Extractable or soil test Mg Recommendation (lb Mg/acre) crops, caneberries, and root crops have responded
Low <60 ppm 10–100 to boron fertilization on B-deficient soils in western
<0.5 meq/100 g soil Oregon. Tree fruits and alfalfa are examples of crops
sensitive to low boron levels east of the Cascade
Medium 60–300 ppm 0–60
Mountain Range.
0.5–2.5 meq/100 g soil
While low levels of boron may limit plant growth,
High >300 ppm 0
high concentrations can be toxic. When applying
>2.5 meq/100 g soil
boron, apply it uniformly as a broadcast application
and mix it thoroughly with the soil.
Sulfate-sulfur (SO –-S)
4 Table 6. Extractable boron (B) soil test categories and
Plants absorb sulfur in the sulfate form. In high- suggested fertilizer rate recommendations.
rainfall areas west of the Cascade Mountain Range,
sulfate is readily leached, and soil tests are not well Soil test B (ppm) Recommendation (lb B/acre)*
correlated with plant growth. In arid regions east of the Very low <0.2 1–3
Cascades, soil test information may be useful. Irrigation Low 0.2–0.5 0–3
water may contain significant amounts of sulfate-sulfur. Medium 0.5–1 0–1
Plant analysis, especially a nitrogen-sulfur (N:S) ratio,
High 1–2 0
is useful for diagnosing a sulfur deficiency.
Excessive >2† 0
Table 5. Sulfate-sulfur soil test categories and * Do not apply B in a concentrated area such as a fertilizer band.
suggested fertilizer rate recommendations, east of † When soil test B is excessive, determine soil and irrigation water electrical
the Cascade Mountain Range. conductivity and B in irrigation water.
Zinc (Zn)
Soil test sulfate-S (ppm) Recommendation (lb S/acre)
A zinc soil test above 1.5 ppm using the DTPA
Very low <2 30–60
extraction method is sufficient for most crops. Corn,
Low 2–5 10–30
beans, grapes, hops, onions, and deciduous fruit trees
Medium 5–20 0–20
are especially sensitive to low levels of soil test Zn.
High >20* 0 Fertilizer applications with zinc sulfate are typically
* When sulfate-S soil test values are high, determine soil and irrigation water 5 to 15 lb Zn per acre.
electrical conductivity.
Copper (Cu)
Copper values above 0.6 ppm using the DTPA
Micronutrients extraction method are sufficient. Copper deficien-
cies are extremely rare, regardless of soil test results.
Deficiencies of micronutrients other than boron
The only deficiencies that have been identified are on
and zinc are uncommon. The availability of most
muck soils such as those in the Klamath and Salem
micronutrients decreases as pH increases (except for
(Lake Labish) areas in Oregon and the Colville
molybdenum, which becomes more available as pH
area in Washington. Routine copper application to
increases). Micronutrient deficiencies rarely occur
mineral soil can cause copper toxicity.
when the soil pH is below 6.5.
5Manganese (Mn) Iron (Fe)
Adequate soil test Mn varies with crop. Soil Soil testing for iron is not recommended.
test values between 1 and 5 ppm using the DTPA Most test methods do not discern between forms
extraction method are usually sufficient. Manganese of iron and therefore have little meaning for plant
deficiencies generally occur only when soil pH is nutrition.
8.0 or above. Iron deficiencies are uncommon on acidic soils in
the Pacific Northwest. Where deficiencies occur, they
Details of Mn deficiency, Mn application, and
soil pH adjustment can be found in the following often are associated with plants adapted to acidic soil,
publication in the OSU Extension Catalog (http:// such as blueberries, azaleas, or rhododendrons, grow-
extension.oregonstate.edu/catalog/): Managing ing on soil with an unsuitably high pH. Acidifying
Manganese Deficiency in Nursery Production of
the soil with elemental sulfur usually will correct Fe
Red Maple (EM 8905).
deficiency for these plants.
Guidance on soil acidification for home gardens
and small acreages in western Oregon is provided
in the following: Acidifying Soil for Blueberries
and Ornamental Plants in the Yard and Garden
West of the Cascade Mountain Range in Oregon
and Washington (EC 1560); Acidifying Soil in
Landscapes and Gardens East of the Cascades
(EC 1585). For large scale agricultural production,
guidance about soil acidification can be found in
the following: Acidifying Soil for Crop Production
West of the Cascade Mountains (EM 8857);
Acidifying Soil for Crop Production: Inland
Figure 2. Left: Healthy red maple. Right: Red maple Pacific Northwest (PNW 599). All available in
with chlorosis from manganese deficiency. To ensure the OSU Extension Catalog (http://extension.
oregonstate.edu/catalog/).
adequate manganese is available for red maple, the
soil pH should be below 5.6 and soil test manganese
values should be above 20 ppm. (Photos © Oregon
State University. From: Altland, J. 2006. Managing
Manganese Deficiency in Nursery Production of
Red Maple. EM 8905. Corvallis, OR: Oregon State
University Extension Service.)
Manganese toxicity is more common in acidic
soil than Mn deficiency. Garlic and onions are the
most sensitive crops grown in Oregon. Manganese
toxicity causes incomplete filling of garlic bulbs
when the soil pH is below 6.5. In contrast, wheat
growth and yield is not limited by Mn until soil pH
is below 5.2. Figure 3. Left: Healthy blueberry leaf. Right: Iron-
deficient blueberry leaf. Note the pale green leaf
Diagnosis of either Mn deficiency or toxicity
area and contrasting green veins on the iron-
should use soil pH and tissue Mn concentration in
deficient leaf. (Photo © Oregon State University.
combination with soil test Mn.
From: Hart, J., D. Horneck, R. Stevens, N. Bell, and
For alkaline soils east of the Cascade Mountain
C. Cogger. 2003. Acidifying Soil for Blueberries and
Range, acidified microzones, such as the area around
Ornamental Plants in the Yard and Garden West of the
fertilizer bands or granules, can increase Mn availability.
Cascade Mountain Range in Oregon and Washington.
These acidified microzones can alleviate the Mn defi-
EC 1560. Corvallis, OR: Oregon State University
ciency sometimes encountered on soil with high pH. Extension Service.)
6Iron salts (such as iron sulfate) applied to alkaline when Cl salts are used to supply potassium or mag-
soil do not remain plant-available for long enough nesium. For example, a 100 lb application of muriate
to be an effective plant nutrient source. Chelated of potash (potassium chloride [0-0-60]) contains 60
iron fertilizers are more effective in alkaline soils lb K O and 45 lb Cl.
2
than inorganic fertilizer materials, but they are very
expensive. The cost usually prohibits use. Lowering pH, lime requirement (LR)
soil pH to increase iron availability on a field scale is
Soil pH expresses soil acidity. Most crops grow
not economical. However, adding acidifying materi-
best when the soil pH is between 6.0 and 8.2.
als such as elemental sulfur to fertilizer mixtures can
Table 8. Soil pH ranges.
acidify microzones around the fertilizer material and
increase Fe availability. pH
Turf often will become darker green when a com-
Strongly acidic <5.1
plete fertilizer containing Fe is applied. The change
Moderately acidic 5.2–6.0
in color is in spite of adequate soil test iron values.
Slightly acidic 6.1–6.5
Molybdenum (Mo)
Neutral 6.6–7.3
Soil Mo concentrations are too low for most
Moderately alkaline 7.4–8.4
labs to evaluate. Molybdenum deficiencies are rare.
Strongly alkaline >8.5
Molybdenum-deficient legumes produced on acidic
soil appear chlorotic or nitrogen deficient. In this
Soil pH can be increased by liming, the applica-
situation, applying lime usually increases soil pH
tion of calcium carbonate (limestone). The soil pH
and alleviates the chlorosis.
test indicates if lime is needed. The lime requirement
Livestock producers desiring information about
test determines how much lime is needed.
molybdenum in forage should have the Mo content
Lime rates in eastern Oregon are much lower
of forage determined.
than in western Oregon, typically 500 to 1,500 lb/acre
compared to 2,000 to 6,000 lb/acre. The lower rates
Chloride (Cl–) reflect sandy soil or a low cation exchange capacity
(CEC). The low lime rates in eastern Oregon are
Soil testing for chloride is not a common practice,
applied with greater frequency than lime in western
and little data exist for interpretation of test results.
Oregon, making the long-term rates for the same
Wheat sometimes benefits from a chloride applica-
crop comparable.
tion. Little information exists on chloride soil test
values and recommended rates in Washington and SMP lime requirement test
Oregon. Chloride is supplied with irrigation water and Refer to individual crop nutrient management or
from organic sources such as manure and compost. fertilizer guides for lime application rate. The infor-
Chloride fertilizer application may occur incidentally mation provided here is very general. SMP stands
for Shoemaker, MacLean, and Pratt—the people who
Table 7. Chloride (Cl) soil test categories and developed the test.
suggested fertilizer rate recommendations. Accurate lime recommendations cannot be made
solely on the basis of soil pH. The SMP test is used to
Soil test Cl Recommendation
(ppm) (lb potassium chloride [0-0-60]/acre) estimate the lime required to raise the pH of 6 inches
of soil. The SMP test is performed by mixing soil
Very low 0–5 0–150
with a solution buffered at pH 7.5 and determining
Low 5–10 0–150
the resulting pH. The soil’s exchangeable hydrogen
Medium 10–20 0–50
or “reserve acidity” lowers the pH of the SMP solu-
High 20–50 0
tion. Soils with low SMP values have high reserve
Excessive >50* 0 acidity and high lime requirements. Conversely, soils
* When soil test Cl is excessive, determine soil and irrigation water electrical that are acidic and have a high SMP buffer have a
conductivity and B in irrigation water. low lime requirement.
7Figure 4. Lime rate increases as SMP test value decreases. Left: Western Oregon (full-strength SMP test).
Right: Eastern Oregon (1/4-strength SMP test). (Charts © Oregon State University. Prepared by Dan M. Sullivan.)
Figure 4 shows the relationship between SMP Some soils may have a low pH (below 5.3) and a
test and lime recommendation. Lime rate increases fairly high SMP test value (above 6.2). This condition
as the SMP test value decreases. can be caused by the application of fertilizer. In this
Table 9 is used to determine the amount of lime case, the low pH value is temporary, and the pH of
required, based on the SMP test, to raise soil pH to a the soil will increase as the fertilizer completes its
desired level. The target pH is determined by the crop to reaction with the soil.
be grown and possibly by other factors such as disease In western Oregon, sandy soils also may have
management. For example, when the SMP test value a low pH and high SMP buffer value. This condi-
is 6 (left column), the recommended rate of lime for tion occurs because sandy soils have low amounts
most crops in western Oregon is 8,400 lb/acre. For of reserve acidity due to low CEC. In such cases,
the same SMP test value, only 1,000 lb aglime/acre is a light application of lime (2,000 to 4,000 lb/acre)
recommended for acid loving crops like blueberries. should suffice to neutralize soil acidity. This amount
The recommendations in table 9 assume that lime is of lime should be applied regardless of the SMP
incorporated by tillage to a depth of 6 inches. test value.
Table 9. Rates of 100 score aglime to raise soil pH determined by use of SMP test.*
Lime rate recommendation (lb/acre)
SMP test result Acid-loving plants Western Oregon field crops, horticultural Eastern Oregon field crops, horticultural
(blueberry, rhododendron, etc.) production and pasture production and pasture
6.7 0 0 0
6.4 0 4,400 1,100
6.0 1,000 8,400 2,100
5.6 2,000 12,600 3,150
5.2 2,000 16,600
4.8 2,000 20,800
* For specific recommendations, refer to individual crop nutrient management or fertilizer guides.
8Table 10. Lime requirement for gardens in western Because salts move readily with water, salt
Oregon based on the SMP test. problems can be transient. Salt toxicity can occur,
and salts may leach before soil is tested. Low salt
When the SMP test result is … Apply this amount of lime (lb/1,000 ft2):
values, therefore, do not always rule out salt toxicity
<5.5 250
as a cause of problems.
5.5–6.0 150–250
Salt tolerance varies greatly among plant spe-
6.0–6.5 100–150 cies. Seedlings are especially sensitive to high salt
>6.5 0 concentrations. Excessive salts may inhibit seed
germination. Excessive fertilization and poor irriga-
tion water quality are sources of salts.
Sodium (Na)
For more information, see the following in the OSU
Sodium is not a plant nutrient and therefore is not Extension Catalog (http://extension.oregonstate.
necessary for plant growth. High levels of sodium edu/catalog/): Managing Salt-affected Soils for
Crop Production (PNW 601).
are detrimental to soil structure, soil permeability,
and plant growth, a problem encountered east of the
Cascade Mountain Range. Organic matter or soil carbon
Sodium levels are evaluated based on exchange-
able sodium percentage (ESP). The ESP is the percent Interpretation
of the CEC occupied by Na. Soil organic matter (OM) is a surrogate for soil
ESP values above 10 percent are of concern. carbon and is measured as a reflection of overall soil
Excessive sodium levels can occur naturally or health. When monitored for several years, it gives
can result from irrigation with high-sodium water. an indication whether soil quality is improving or
Reclamation involves establishment of drainage degrading. Soil OM is important to a wide variety of
followed by gypsum application and leaching with soil chemical, physical, and biological properties. As
low-sodium water. soil OM increases, so does CEC, soil total N content,
and other soil properties such as water-holding capac-
Soluble salts ity and microbiological activity. As OM increases, so
does the ability to adsorb and reduce effectiveness
Soluble salt problems usually are associated
of many soil-applied herbicides.
with arid regions in eastern Oregon and Washington.
Soil OM is in equilibrium with climate, soil min-
Soils with high levels of soluble salts are called
eralogy, and environment, providing limited capacity
saline soils. Soils high in sodium are called sodic
to accumulate organic matter. A soil with 2 percent
soils (see “Sodium” section). Saline-sodic soils are
OM will not increase to 10 percent under normal
high in both soluble salts and sodium. Soluble salts
farming or gardening practices. A 2 percent increase
are measured by electrical conductivity (EC) of a
in soil OM (e.g., from 1 to 3 percent or from 4 to 6
saturated paste soil extract.
percent) would be considered a large change and the
maximum likely for most situations in Oregon. Soil
OM could increase more than 2 percent in a garden
Table 11. Soluble salts determined from a saturated
paste extract. or area receiving large amounts of compost or other
organic residue.
EC (mmhos/cm)* ppm salt† Suitability for crop production
Soil OM content is not a quantitative indicator of
Low <1.0 <640 Suitable the capacity of soil to supply plant-available nitrogen
Medium 1.0–2.5 640–1,600 Marginal (PAN) for plant growth even though a soil with more
High >2.5 >1,600 Poor, unsuitable for many crops OM contains more total N. The timing and amount
of PAN released from soil organic matter is depen-
Note: Some laboratories determine EC using a 1:1 or 2:1 ratio of water to soil,
dent on soil temperature, moisture, and many other
which provides a substantially lower value than the saturated paste extract. No
relationship has been established for converting 1:1 or 2:1 EC to saturated paste EC. soil management factors. Laboratories that estimate
* mmhos/cm is equivalent to deci-siemen/m (dS/m) and milli-siemen/cm (mS/cm). plant-available N release based on soil OM typically
† Multiply mmhos/cm by 640 to estimate ppm salt. do not have calibration data to support their estimates.
9Methods for determining soil organic matter Combustion method is more accurate and reproduc-
Soil OM values vary with method used for the ible than the LOI method because it directly measures
analysis. Utility of soil OM data is dependent upon the central component of organic matter (carbon),
analytical method. Before soil OM is determined, while LOI measures weight loss (includes organic
determine the analytical method to be used. If you matter plus some water adhering to soil minerals).
are monitoring OM, use the same analytical labora- For monitoring soil OM, the Combustion method is
tory and analytical method. Differences in results the most suitable test.
from varying methods can mask changes in OM
from management. Cation exchange capacity (CEC)
Laboratory methods used to determine OM
CEC is a measure of a soil’s capacity to retain
include the following:
and release elements such as K, Ca, Mg, and Na.
• Loss On Ignition (LOI) method—sample
Soils with high clay and/or organic matter content
weight loss on ignition at 360ºC–400ºC
have high CEC. Sandy, low organic matter soils have
• Combusion method—combustion of sample at
low CEC. Soil CEC is relatively constant, so no need
900ºC–1800ºC and direct measurement of C lost
exists for repeated analyses.
in gas
Some laboratories estimate CEC based on soil
• Walkley-Black method—wet chemistry reac-
texture, organic matter content, cations, SMP, and pH.
tion of soil C with an oxidizing agent (potassium
Such estimates can be inaccurate. The “sum of bases”
dichromate)
method for calculating CEC can give inaccurate
Choosing one of these methods for organic mat-
results, especially in high pH soils containing lime.
ter determination involves consideration of factors
CEC is used to estimate the amount of elemental
outlined in table 12.
sulfur required for soil acidification in western Oregon
What method is preferred?
and Washington. Acidifying soil is sometimes neces-
The LOI method is the least expensive. The sary for production of blueberries or nursery stock
Combusion and Walkley-Black methods are both such as rhododendrons and red maple.
moderate to high cost. When only an approximate
For more information, see the following in
value for soil organic matter is needed, the less
the OSU Extension Catalog (http://extension.
expensive LOI test is probably adequate. oregonstate.edu/catalog/): Acidifying Soil for
The Combusion and Walkley-Black methods both Crop Production West of the Cascade Mountains
provide high accuracy and high reproducibility; the (EM 8857); Acidifying Soil for Crop Production:
Inland Pacific Northwest (PNW 599).
LOI method is less accurate and less reproducible. The
Table 12. Factors to consider in choosing soil organic matter laboratory method.
Method Test cost and availability Suitability for soil with carbonate Accuracy and reproducibility Comments
Loss on Ignition Low cost; often included in Suitable Low to medium; results inconsistent LOI value can be higher or lower
routine soil test “package” than “true” value determined by
direct measurement
Combustion* Moderate to high cost; Suitable after sample pretreatment High Preferred test
available as additional test to remove carbonates
upon request at many labs
Walkley-Black* Moderate to high cost; not Suitable High Test generates a toxic waste
offered at many labs (chromium)
*Soil C determined via Combustion or Walkley-Black method is expressed as OM via the following equation: OM = C × 1.7.
10Base saturation Since base saturation is simply an indirect
Base saturation is the percentage of the soil CEC expression of soil pH, it is not required for making
that is occupied by basic cations (calcium, magne- fertilizer or lime recommendations. In acidic soils,
sium, potassium, sodium) at the current soil pH value. base saturation and soil pH change simultaneously.
Base saturation and CEC are nearly equivalent (base Liming increases base saturation and soil pH. Sulfur
saturation is 100 percent) when soil pH is near 7. An application will reduce base saturation and pH. Base
acidic soil has a base saturation of about 50 percent saturation is not a useful concept in alkaline soils,
when the soil pH is about 5. where base saturation equals or exceeds 100 percent.
Table 13. Unit conversions.*
To convert column 1 into column 2, divide by Column 1 Column 2 To convert column 2 into column 1, multiply by
390 ppm K meq K/100 g soil 390
200 ppm Ca meq Ca/100 g soil 200
121 ppm Mg meq Mg/100 g soil 121
230 ppm Na meq Na/100 g soil 230
1 meq/100 g soil cmol/kg soil 1
3.5† lb/acre (1 ft depth) ppm 3.5†
43.56 lb/acre lb/1,000 ft2 43.56
43,560 ft2 acres 43,560
2.471 acres hectares 2.471
2.3 PO P 2.3
2 5
1.2 KO K 1.2
2
* Units used in analytical reports vary. For example, 1 ppm (w/w) = 1 mg/kg or 1 ug/g. Use the conversions in this table to change a unit into a term familiar to you.
† This factor depends on soil bulk density. 3.5 x ppm = lb/acre-ft when soil bulk density is 1.3 grams per cm3 (81 lb/ft3). These soils typically have a medium to fine texture.
Use 4 when the soil is “sandy,” more than 60 percent sand.
11Acknowledgements Hart, J.M., D.M. Sullivan, J.R. Myers, and R.E. Peachey. 2010.
Sweet Corn Nutrient Management Guide (Western
This publication was adapted and updated from the
Oregon). EM 9010. Corvallis, OR: Oregon State University
following: Marx, E.S., J. Hart, and R.G. Stevens. 1996. Soil Test
Extension Service.
Interpretation Guide. EC 1478. Corvallis, OR: Oregon State
Horneck, D.A., J.W. Ellsworth, B.G. Hopkins, D.M. Sullivan,
University Extension Service.
and R.G. Stevens. 2007. Managing Salt-affected Soils for
This guide was reviewed by the following individuals: Nick
Crop Production. PNW 601. Corvallis, OR: Oregon State
Andrews, Small Farms Program, North Willamette Research and
University Extension Service.
Extension Center, Oregon State University; Patrick Peterson,
Horneck, D., J. Hart, R. Stevens, S. Petrie, and J. Altland. 2004.
Marion Ag Service, Inc., St. Paul, Oregon; Ben Piper, Wilbur-Ellis
Acidifying Soil for Crop Production West of the Cascade
Company, Woodburn, Oregon.
Mountains (Western Oregon and Washington). EM 8857.
Corvallis, OR: Oregon State University Extension Service.
For more information
Horneck, Donald, Donald Wysocki, Bryan Hopkins, John
The following publications and nutrient management Hart, and Robert Stevens. 2007. Acidifying Soil for Crop
guides/fertilizer guides for many individual crops are avail- Production: Inland Pacific Northwest. PNW 599. Corvallis,
able through the Oregon State University Extension Service OR: Oregon State University Extension Service.
Publications and Multimedia Catalog (http://extension. Locke, K., D. Horneck, J. Hart, and R. Stevens. 2006. Acidifying Soil
oregonstate.edu/catalog/): in Landscapes and Gardens East of the Cascades. EC 1585.
Corvallis, OR: Oregon State University Extension Service.
Altland, J. 2006. Managing Manganese Deficiency in Nursery Staben, M.L., J.W. Ellsworth, D.M. Sullivan, D. Horneck, B.D.
Production of Red Maple. EM 8905. Corvallis, OR: Oregon Brown, and R.G. Stevens. 2003. Monitoring Soil Nutrients
State University Extension Service. Using a Management Unit Approach. PNW 570. Corvallis,
Anderson, Nicole P., John M. Hart, Neil W. Christensen, Mark E. OR: Oregon State University Extension Service.
Mellbye, and Michael D. Flowers. 2010. Using the Nitrogen Sullivan, D.M., and C.G. Cogger. 2003. Post-harvest Soil Nitrate
Mineralization Soil Test to Predict Spring Fertilizer N Rate for Testing for Manured Cropping Systems West of the Cascade
Soft White Winter Wheat Grown in Western Oregon. EM 9020. Mountain Range. EM 8832. Corvallis, OR: Oregon State
Corvallis, OR: Oregon State University Extension Service. University Extension Service.
Anderson, Nicole P., John M. Hart, Donald A. Horneck, Dan M.
Sullivan, Neil W. Christensen, and Gene J. Pirelli. 2010.
Evaluating Soil Nutrients and pH by Depth in Situations of
© 2011 Oregon State University.
Limited or No Tillage in Western Oregon. EM 9014. Corvallis,
OR: Oregon State University Extension Service. Authors: Donald A. Horneck, Extension agronomist;
Corp, M.K., D.A. Horneck, D. Wysocki, and L. Lutcher. 2006. Dan M. Sullivan, Extension soil scientist; Jim S. Owen,
Extension horticulturist; John M. Hart, professor of crop
Monitoring Soil Nutrients in Dryland Systems Using
and soil science, emeritus; all of Oregon State University.
Management Units. EM 8920. Corvallis, OR: Oregon State
University Extension Service. This publication was produced and distributed in further-
Gardner, E. Hugh, Michael Robotham, and John Hart. 2003. Soil ance of the Acts of Congress of May 8 and June 30, 1914.
Sampling for Home Gardens and Small Acreages. EC 628. Extension work is a cooperative program of Oregon State
University, the U.S. Department of Agriculture, and Oregon
Corvallis, OR: Oregon State University Extension Service.
counties. Oregon State University Extension Service offers
Hart, J., D. Horneck, R. Stevens, N. Bell, and C. Cogger. Acidifying
educational programs, activities, and materials without
Soil for Blueberries and Ornamental Plants in the Yard and
discrimination based on age, color, disability, gender
Garden West of the Cascade Mountain Range in Oregon identity or expression, marital status, national origin,
and Washington. EC 1560. Corvallis, OR: Oregon State race, religion, sex, sexual orientation, or veteran’s status.
University Extension Service. Oregon State University Extension Service is an Equal
Opportunity Employer.
Hart, J., D. Sullivan, M. Gamroth, T. Downing, and A. Peters.
2009. Silage Corn Nutrient Management Guide (Western
Originally published August 1996. Revised July 2011.
Oregon). EM 8978. Corvallis, OR: Oregon State University
Extension Service.
12