SUSTAINABLE MANAGEMENT OF SOIL HEALTH
(ISBN: 978-93-88901-98-7)
Editors
Dr. Surajyoti Pradhan
Dr. Prem Kumar Bharteey
Dr. Sushmita Thokchom
August 2023First Edition: August, 2023
ISBN: 978-93-88901-98-7
© Copyright reserved by the Editor
Publication, Distribution and Promotion Rights reserved by Bhumi Publishing, Nigave Khalasa,
Kolhapur
Despite every effort, there may still be chances for some errors and omissions to have crept in
inadvertently.
No part of this publication may be reproduced in any form or by any means, electronically,
mechanically, by photocopying, recording or otherwise, without the prior permission of the
publishers.
The views and results expressed in various articles are those of the authors and not of editors or
publisher of the book.
Published by:
Bhumi Publishing,
Nigave Khalasa, Kolhapur 416207, Maharashtra, India
Website: www. bhumipublishing. com
E-mail: bhumipublishing@gmail. com
Book Available online at:
https://www. bhumipublishing. com/book/PREFACE
A summary of how to improve soil health can be found in the new book
"Sustainable Soil Health Management" by Dr. Surajyoti Pradhan, Dr. Prem Kumar
Bharteey and Dr. Sushmita Thokchom. This book is a compilation of important
articles written by renowned experts in the field of managing soil health and
Sustainable Agriculture. Soil is essential for economic and social growth because it
provides food, fodder, fiber, and renewable energy to support human, animal, and
plant life. However, in our rush to grow more food, soils have been particularly abused
to the point where they are now threatening our health and well-being. Because there
is no chance of increasing cultivated area further, much of the desired increase in food
grain output must be done through increasing productivity per unit area. Soil health, a
physical, chemical, and biological process, is currently displaying signs of tiredness as a
result of intensive cultivation, over-mining of nutrients by crops, and lower
replenishment through organic and inorganic sources of organic nutrients. One of the
reasons for stagnant or declining yields is frequently attributed to the ongoing
reduction in soil health. Our soils are not only not very fertile, but over time, multi-
nutrient deficits are being created in many regions due to improper, unbalanced, and
inefficient nutrient utilization. This, along with ineffective field water management, is
the main factor contributing to low nutrient and water use efficiency, which raises
production costs. Every year, there is a net deficiency of around 10 million tonnes of
nutrients added and removed from the soil in Indian agriculture. Soils are currently
displaying a lack of secondary nutrients such as sulphur, as well as a lack of/toxicity of
certain micronutrients. The ICAR institutes, SAUs, and All India Co-ordinated Research
Projects (AICRP) have developed a number of location-specific and environmentally
friendly technologies to improve and maintain soil physical, chemical, and biological
health and yield sustainability. This can be achieved only by implementing sustainable
methods and sustainable solutions in agriculture which have been discussed in the
current book in order to protect, maintain, and promote soil health and to achieve the
objective of increased productivity and sustainability without causing any harm to the
soil system or the environment, suggestions have also been made to review, improve,
and reinforce the current programs. We hope that this book imparts basic and
innovative knowledge of several soil health and Sustainable agriculture
- EditorsTABLE OF CONTENT
Sr. No. Book Chapter and Author(s) Page No.
SOIL HEALTH AND IT’S CO-RELATIONSHIP WITH
SUSTAINABLE AGRICULTURE
1. 1 – 6
Surajyoti Pradhan, Prem Kumar Bharteey, Ayush Bahuguna,
Nidhi Luthra and Sudhir Pal
ROLE OF MICRO-ORGANISM FOR IMPROVING SOIL HEALTH
2. 7 – 19
Manoharmayum Monica Devi and Keisham Dony Devi
IMPACT OF MACRO-ORGANISMS ON SUSTAINABLE SOIL
HEALTH
3. 20 – 27
Keisham Dony Devi, Manoharmayum Monica Devi and
Toko Jumi
THE FUNCTIONAL AND ENVIRONMENTAL BENEFITS OF
4. BIOENGINEERED MICROORGANISMS 28 – 39
Lal Ji Bharti and Ramdeen Kumar
INM: A KEY FOR SOIL HEALTH AND SUSTAINABLE
AGRICULTURE
5. 40 – 52
Jahnabi Hazarika, Surajyoti Pradhan,
Pritom Kumar Borthakur and Sanjib Sharma
ROLE OF ORGANIC MANURE FOR IMPROVING SOIL HEALTH
6. Vikash Kumar Shakywal, Surajyoti Pradhan, 53 – 71
Srijana Marasini and Ramdeen Kumar
COMPOSTING: AN EFFECTIVE APPROACH FOR
7. SOIL HEALTH MANAGEMENT 72 – 83
Priyobarta Singh Khumukcham and Chandan A. S
VERMICOMPOST: A VIABLE RESOURCE IN ORGANIC
8. FARMING 84 – 91
Shweta Rathour and Ramdeen Kumar
APPLICATION OF BIOCHAR: AN EFFECTIVE WAY OF
IMPROVING SOIL FERTILITY
9. 92 – 97
Chandan A.S, Ranjan Das, P. Sandhya Rani,
N.V. Sarala and Rajesh Chintey
SOIL HEALTH MANAGEMENT IN DRYLAND AREAS
10. 98 – 107
Jyotirupa Kalita, Tilak Prasad Panika and Francis Xavier Barla
ORGANIC PLANT NUTRIENT FOR MAXIMIZING NUTRIENT
11. USE EFFICIENCY 108 – 118
Jahnabi Hazarika and Tilak Prasad PanikaCLIMATE SMART CROPPING SYSTEMS: LEADING THE WAY
12. IN SOIL HEALTH MANAGEMENT 119 – 128
Sayoni Das, Ombir Singh, Sandeep Kumar and Ranjeet Kumar
ROLE OF INTEGRATED FARMING SYSTEM IN SUSTAINED
13. FARMER’S INCOME 129 – 137
Chandan A. S. and Priyobartasingh Khumukcham
INTEGRATING NANOTECHNOLOGY INTO AGRICULTURAL
14. SYSTEMS FOR SUSTAINABILITY 138 – 146
Surajyoti Pradhan Rajashree Patra and Ramdeen Kumar
NATURAL FARMING: WAY FOR SUSTAINABLE AGRICULTURE
15. 147 – 164
Surajyoti Pradhan and Geetanjali PradhanSustainable Management of Soil Health
(ISBN: 978-93-88901-98-7)
CHAPTER 1
SOIL HEALTH AND IT’S CO-RELATIONSHIP WITH
SUSTAINABLE AGRICULTURE
Surajyoti Pradhan*1, Prem Kumar Bharteey2, Ayush Bahuguna2,
Nidhi Luthra2 and Sudhir Pal2
1Department of Agronomy, KVK, Mayurbhanj-2,
Odisha University of Agriculture and Technology
2Department of Agricultural Chemistry & Soil Science,
C.C.R (P.G.) College, Muzaffarnagar-251 001, Uttar Pradesh, India
*Corresponding author E-mail: surajyotipradhan.18@gmail.com
Soil health is indeed a crucial concept in agriculture and environmental science. It
encompasses the overall well-being and functionality of soil as a living ecosystem. The five vital
functions you mentioned are often used to evaluate and describe soil health:
1. Sustaining plant and animal life: Soil provides a habitat for a diverse community of
organisms, from microorganisms like bacteria and fungi to larger organisms like
earthworms and insects. These organisms play essential roles in nutrient cycling,
decomposition of organic matter, and soil structure formation, ultimately supporting
plant growth and providing a food source for higher trophic levels
2. Regulating water flow and storage: Healthy soil can retain and release water
effectively. It acts as a sponge, absorbing and holding moisture during wet periods,
reducing runoff and erosion. During dry periods, it slowly releases stored water, helping
to maintain a stable moisture supply for plants.
3. Filtering and buffering potential pollutants: Soil acts as a natural filter, removing and
immobilizing contaminants from water that percolates through it. It also serves as a
buffer against the leaching of harmful substances, ensuring that pollutants do not reach
groundwater or surface water bodies.
4. Cycling and recycling nutrients: Soil plays a critical role in nutrient cycling,
transforming organic matter into nutrients that are accessible to plants and other
organisms. Nutrient cycling ensures that essential elements like nitrogen, phosphorus,
and carbon are available for plant growth and microbial activity, promoting ecosystem
productivity.
5. Providing physical stability and support: Soil structure is essential for plant root
anchorage and penetration, as well as for allowing air and water to move through the
soil. Healthy soil maintains good physical structure, preventing compaction and
promoting aeration, which is crucial for root development and overall plant health.
Principle of Soil health management:
The major principles of soil health management are centred on the following key
practices which are ultimately required for maximizing profitability.
1Bhumi Publishing, India
Minimize
Disturbance
Principles of
Maximize Maximize
Living Roots Soil Health Biodiversity
Maximize
Soil Cover
Fig.1 Principles of Soil Health
Soil health assessment:
It is impossible to assess soil health solely by looking at agricultural production, water
quality, or any other single result. We analyze indications since it is impossible to directly
measure soil health. Indicators are quantifiable characteristics of soil or plants that offer hints
about the soil's capacity for function. Physical, chemical, and biological qualities, functions, or
traits of soils can be indicators. They could also be physical or aesthetic characteristics of plants.
Suitable indicators
Different indicators for soil health:
Organic matter content in the soil: promotes soil fertility, soil structure, soil stability, and
resistance to soil erosion. Numerous plant nutrients, including nitrogen, phosphorus, and sulfur,
are stored in soil organic matter. The amount of nitrogen, phosphorous, and sulfur present in an
acre is approximately 1,000 pounds per percentage point of organic matter in the top 6 inches of
soil. The majority of nutrients included in organic materials are not, however, readily absorbed
by plants. Nutrients in organic matter must be transformed into inorganic forms by soil
organisms through decomposition and mineralization before they can be utilized by plants.
Physical properties: compaction, plough pan, water movement, porosity, and tilth; bulk density,
infiltration, soil structure and macropores, soil depth, and water holding capacity => retention
and transport of water and nutrients; habitat for soil microbes; estimation of crop yield potential.
Chemical properties: electrical conductivity, reactive carbon, soil nitrate, soil pH, and
extractable phosphorus and potassium => biological and chemical activity thresholds; plant and
microbial activity thresholds; and nutrient availability and potential N and P loss in plants
Biological properties: Earthworms, microbial biomass C and N, particulate organic matter,
possibly mineralizable N, soil enzymes, soil respiration, and total organic carbon are biological
factors that result in microbial catalysis and a C and N repository, soil productivity, and the
ability to supply N.
2Sustainable Management of Soil Health
(ISBN: 978-93-88901-98-7)
Soil assessment using modern tools and models:
Diffuse reflectance spectroscopy (DRS) in the visible to near-infrared (wavelength range:
350-2500 nm) region (VNIR) is emerging as a viable alternative to traditional laboratory
methods for evaluating a variety of soil parameters (Van der Meer, 2018). The DRS approach is
appealing since it is quick, environmentally benign, and non-invasive, and DRS data may be
acquired using both proximal sensors and onboard remote sensing systems. Singh et al. (2019)
have demonstrated that the DRS-and wet chemistry-based soil testing techniques yield
equivalent nutrient recommendations for cocoa growing. This is a crucial conclusion in favour of
supplementing the wet chemistry approach with the DRS approach of soil testing, yet studies
also indicate that the accuracy of the DRS approach is questionable and needs constant
modification. The potential to use remote sensing to deploy these sensors on aircraft and satellite
platforms and capture hyperspectral data for quantitative soil surface property mapping is
another benefit of VNIR technology (Sahoo, 2022).
Soil health issues in India:
According to the New Delhi-based National Academy of Agricultural Sciences
(NAAS), the annual soil loss rate in our country is about 15.35 tonnes per ha, resulting in a loss
of 5.37 to 8.4 million tonnes of nutrients.
• Soil erosion: It is the removal of soil by natural factors, primarily water and wind, more
quickly than its replacement can occur. It has an impact on the nation's overall economy
and agricultural productivity.
• Stream erosion: It involves the separation and removal of soil components using water.
It shows up as rilling, gullying, sheetwashing, and the rain-peeling process. The slope,
vegetation cover, and soil characteristics all affect erosion rate.
• Erosion by wind: The top soil layer is removed by the wind, and wind erosion is
worsened when the soil is dry, poorly aggregated, and vegetated.
• Human-made causes of soil erosion are Deforestation, which depletes the soil of its
organic matter, Overgrazing weakens the structure of the soil incorrect agricultural
practices, including plowing, a lack of crop rotation, and shifting cultivation
Indian soils often have high potassium levels but low levels of nitrogen and phosphorus.
The Indo-Gangetic plains, Central India, and North East India have low phosphorus levels.
Additionally, there is a national shortage of nitrogen; however, it is greater in central and
southern India than in the Gangetic plains. Long-term unbalanced fertilizer nutrient use has also
been reported to have a negative impact on soil health. According to a 2017 analysis by the
Fertilizer Association of India, the optimal n-p-k utilization ratio is 4:1; however, from 6:2.4:1 in
1990 to 6.7:2.7:1 in 2016, this ratio has decreased. According to the 54th report of the
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Agriculture (2017–18), the imbalance in the usage of
fertilizers is caused by a biased subsidy policy in favor of urea and excessive prices for other
fertilisers. Indian soil is becoming less fertile as a result of extractive farming methods such as
crop waste clearance and in-field burning (common in north-west India). In India, 55% of the
3Bhumi Publishing, India
soil has always been nitrogen deficient. Then, 42% are phosphorus-poor, and 44% are organic
carbon deficient.
Soil health components for sustainable agriculture:
Physical
Properties
Soil
Sustainable Chemical
Organic
Agriculture Properties
Carbon
Biological
Properties
In the scientific literature, the phrases "soil health" and "soil quality" are frequently used
interchangeably, and some people think that they are functionally equivalent. Scientists favor the
phrase "soil quality," whereas farmers prefer "soil health" (Karlen et al., 2003). For, the purpose
of monitoring soils, (Ritz et al. 2009) identified and tested 183 biotic markers. The most
prevalent parameters for biological indicators were: (1) soil microbial taxa and terminal
restriction fragment length polymorphism; (2) soil microbial community structure and biomass
using extracted lipids, particularly phospholipid fatty acids, as signature lipid biomarkers; and (3)
soil microbial biomass. (3) Multiple substrate-induced respiration of soil, (4) multi-enzyme
profiling of biochemical processes, (5) worms, including maturity index (the distribution of
nematodes across functional groups), taxonomic number, and abundance of individual functional
groups (6) Microarthropod, (7) on-site visual observation of soil fauna and flora, (8) pitfall traps
for ground-dwelling and soil invertebrates, and (9) microbial biomass, the total amount of life
belowground. However, they came to the conclusion that more research is needed to ascertain
how these biological indicators are responsive to changes in management, how they are
connected to soil functions, and how they might be used to shed light on certain ecological
processes. Determining the components of soil health is crucial for the effective use of global
and national agricultural monitoring systems and therefore for the long-term sustainability of our
agricultural systems. According to research, healthy soil inhibits pathogens, supports biological
processes, breaks down organic matter, inactivates harmful substances, and recycles nutrients,
energy, and water [Sahu et al., 2017]. The definition of soil quality given by Karlen et al. [2003]
was "the capacity of specific kind of soil to function, within natural or managed ecosystem
boundaries, to sustain plant and animal productivity, maintain or enhance water and air quality,
4Sustainable Management of Soil Health
(ISBN: 978-93-88901-98-7)
and support human health and habitation." Additionally, Bouma et al. (2017) gave a broader
definition of soil quality as "the intrinsic capacity of a soil to contribute to ecosystem services,
including biomass production." Regarding specific ecosystem services, the idea of soil quality
provides useful applications [Toth, 2008]. "Soil quality," refers to the biological qualities and
functions of soil that interact closely with its chemical and physical aspects. As was already
mentioned, "soil quality" and "soil health" are used interchangeably in the literature. In terms of
timeline, they can be distinguished; "soil health" refers to the state of the soil over a short period
of time, while "soil quality" refers to the state of the soil over a longer period of time, very
similar to the state of a person at a certain time (health) and over a long period of time (quality of
life) [Acton et al., 1995]. In order to test soil status and track the impact of past, present, and
future land usage on agricultural sustainability, the phrases "soil health" and "soil quality" were
utilized. Soil salinization, acidification, compaction, crusting, nutrient shortage, decrease in soil
biota biodiversity and biomass, water imbalance, and disruption of the elemental cycle are
unsuitable agricultural practices that degrade soil quality [Lal, 2015]. In a nutshell, preserving
and restoring soil health enables producers to work in synchronous with the land – not against
which will not only pave the way to reduce erosion, maximize water infiltration, enhance
nutrient cycling, and save money on inputs but also ultimately improve the resiliency of their
farm.
Government initiatives for soil health management:
The Government of India has also launched several programmes for the welfare of
farmers like distribution of Soil Health Cards, the selling of neem oil-coated urea, a nutrient-
based subsidy policy for P and K fertilizers, organic farming, Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojna,
National Mission on Sustainable Agriculture, National Action Plan for Climate Change
(NAPCC), National Water Mission, National Mission for a Green India under NAPCC, Mission
for Integrated Development of Horticulture, and National Mission on Oilseeds & Oil Palm etc.
Conclusion:
The practice of intensive agriculture, which is used to supply the food needs of an ever-
growing population, has a severe impact on the health of the soil. Plant productivity and soil
health are both supported by a balanced microbiome. The interaction between soil-dwelling
microorganisms and plants is intricate. In this discourse, which is mediated by root exudates,
there is still a lot more translating needed. In order to enhance the nutrient status of the soil and
agricultural productivity, biofertilizers are an economical and environmentally friendly
component of the plant and soil. To summarize, different practices which may include efficient
utilization of soil macro and micro-organisms as well as bioengineered micro-organisms,
Climate-smart diversified cropping system, Use of Integrated nutrient management in initial
years and slowly moving towards harnessing the full potential of Organic manure along with
compost, application of biochar as well as adopting IFS and integrating nano technology into all
of these can unquestionably achieve sustainable soil health management. It can be achieved
through conservation and restoration of soil organic matter, sequestering more carbon, enhancing
5Bhumi Publishing, India
water infiltration, and improving wildlife and pollinator habitat as a result, all while reaping
more revenues and, in some cases, higher yields in a sustainable way
References:
Acton, D., & Gregorich, L. (1995). Understanding soil health. In D.F. Acton & L.J. Gregorich
(Eds.), The Health of Our Soil; towards sustainable agriculture in Canada (p. 138). Centre
for Land and Biological Resources Research Branch, Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada:
Ottawa, ON, Canada.
Bouma, J., van Ittersum, M., Stoorvogel, J., Batjes, N., Droogers, P., & Pulleman, M. (2017).
Soil capability: Exploring the functional potentials of soil. In Global Soil Security (pp. 27–
44). Springer: Cham, Switzerland.
Chaussod, R. (2002). La qualité biologique des sols: Des concepts aux applications. Comptes
Rendus de l’Académie d’Agriculture de France, 88, 61–68.
Karlen, D.L., Ditzler, C., & Andrews, S.S. (2003). Soil quality: Why and how? Geoderma, 114,
145–156.
Lal, R. (2015). Restoring soil quality to mitigate soil degradation. Sustainability, 7, 5875–5895.
Ritz, K., Black, H.I.J., Campbell, C.D., Harris, J.A., & Wood, C. (2009). Selecting the biological
indicators for monitoring soils: A framework for balancing scientific and technical opinion
to assist policy development. Ecological Indicators, 9, 1212–1221.
Sahoo, R.N. (2022). Sensor-Based Monitoring of Soil and Crop Health for Enhancing Input Use
Efficiency. In Food, Energy, and Water Nexus (pp. 129-147). Springer, Cham.
Sahu, N., Vasu, D., Sahu, A., Lal, N., & Singh, S.K. (2017). Strength of Microbes in Nutrient
Cycling: A Key to Soil Health. In V. Meena, P. Mishra, J. Bisht, & A. Pattanayak (Eds.),
Agriculturally Important Microbes for Sustainable Agriculture (pp. 69–86). Springer:
Singapore.
Timsina, J. (2018). Can organic sources of nutrients increase crop yields to meet global food
demand? Agronomy, 8, 214.
Tóth, G. (2008). Agri-Environmental Soil Quality Indicator in the European Perspective (p. 12).
European Commission Joint Research Centre, OECD: Ispra, Italy.
van der Meer, F. (2018). Near-infrared laboratory spectroscopy of mineral chemistry: a review.
International Journal of Applied Earth Observation and Geoinformation, 65, 71-78.
6Sustainable Management of Soil Health
(ISBN: 978-93-88901-98-7)
CHAPTER 2
ROLE OF MICRO-ORGANISM FOR IMPROVING SOIL HEALTH
Manoharmayum Monica Devi*1 and Keisham Dony Devi2
1Department of Soil Science & Agricultural Chemistry,
2Department of Agronomy,
Central Agricultural University, Imphal, Manipur
*Corresponding author: manoharmonica17@gmail.com
Introduction:
Soil is the three-dimensional body that supports the life system on earth. It helps in
maintaining ecosystem balance which plays a crucial role in peaceful coexistence. Besides these,
soil is formed by the chemical and biological weathering of underlying rocks. Generally, the soil
is a reservoir that supplies a greater part of the world’s biodiversity reserve, subjugated by
microorganisms, viz. bacteria, fungi, actinomycetes, and algae. Besides these organisms, soil
biota contains a large variety of animals like nematodes, protozoans, macro and micro-
arthropods and earthworms. Moreover, a large population of macro fauna species are inhabiting
in the uppermost layers of soili.e., the soil surface and the litter layer (Beck et al., 2005). Even
soil biota is involved in the cycling of nutrient residues, organic matter and energy. Thus, soil
organisms are an integral part of soil including plants, animals, microorganisms and their
interactions. They are responsible for supporting ecological balance in ecosystems, plant
metabolism and their nutrient uptake, crop yield and productivity, water cycling and soil
formation process, thereby regulating soil erosion and water purification (Mendes et al., 2016).
The growing population demands higher food production which is mainly met through the use of
chemical inputs viz. fertilizers, insecticides, pesticides, growth hormones, etc. which have served
as mandatory needs. Haphazard application of such chemicals can cause detrimental effects on
crop as well as soil health. There was a need to consider soil health status while incorporating
such synthetic sources otherwise we might face indiscriminate problems and hurdles in the
future. In order to mend these discrepancies, we should think of a holistic approach so that
amelioration of soil health status can meet the current soil health. So, the production of better
crop yield, quality products and expression of better crops need compatible relations between
soil fertility and microorganisms. Therefore, the protection of soil microorganism population in
their niche in association with soil health is of utmost important in this pretext. Soil health is
defined as the ability of soil to function within the environment and network, to withstand
biological productivity according to Doran et al., 1994, maximize environmental quality, and
endorse plant and animal health. The dynamics of microorganisms uphold ecosystem balance in
agriculture. These microorganisms exist in rhizospheres which constitute a complex group of
saprophytes, endophytes and actinomycetes both beneficial and harmful ones.
7Bhumi Publishing, India
Re-evaluating the physical and practical assortment of soil microorganisms
Microorganisms play a significant role in assisting all floras in their environments. Soils
act as residence to thousands of diverse species of bacteria and soil itself can be viewed as a
living organism. It was found that one cubic foot of soil contains over 10,000 species of bacteria,
100 species of protozoa, 10,000 nematodes, 100 species of algae and over 5000 individual
insects. Overall soils contain valuable bacteria, fungi, algae, protozoa, nematodes, cyanobacteria
as well as earthworms. So, living organisms are a vital component in maintaining soil physical,
chemical and biological equilibrium thereby sustaining their health status. Besides affecting soil
structure and fertility, plants and soil microorganisms attain their nutrients from soil and in turn
change soil properties by organic litter deposition and metabolic activities of microorganisms.
They affect plant growth directly through the management of hormone signaling, speeding up the
decomposition of organic matter, regulating deliverance of nutrients in the form of nitrogen,
phosphorous, potassium, hydrogen and carbon in soil and protection against pathogens.
Importance of microorganism
Soil microorganisms play chief roles as chemical engineers, through the cycling of
carbon and decomposition of organic matter; impelling soil pH by nitrification and
denitrification; anthropogenic complexes’ degradation, fixation of nitrogen and phosphorus
solubilization making it available for plants; and influencing mobility of heavy metals. Soil
microorganisms have a direct impact on human health since they form the basis for those
antibiotics administered to control diseases (Mendes et al., 2016). Not all forms of elements
added into the soil are directly taken up by the plants. Initially, they are converted into inorganic
form by the microorganisms through mineralization which can be easily taken up by the plants
for their metabolisms. The nitrogen need by the plants is available in the form of organic
nitrogen which is first converted into amino acid and then to ammonia which then thereby
undergoes a nitrification process through different nitrifying bacteria viz. Nitrosomonas and
Nitrobacter through different biochemical processes. Thus, a healthy population of soil microbes
can enhance the efficiency of fertilizer for plant uptake. It also affects the structure and fertility
of different soils thereby responsible for maintaining soil quality and health. It also helps in
increasing soil aeration and penetrability.
Carbons promote the populations of soil microbes. One of the carbon sources is humus
(Humic acid) which plays many roles in the soil profile. Besides its role in helping plants uptake
most of the difficult elements namely primarily metals through the natural chelation process,
humus also helps in maintaining moisture on sandy soils. A good level of humus in the soil will
help to retain soil moisture as well as improve the soil structure (drainage/pore space). Apart
from these, the soil microorganism has diseases controlling mechanism against several pests and
diseases.
Types of soil organisms
Soil organisms are classified into two types – macro-organisms and micro-organisms.
Macro-organisms are those which can be seen with our naked eye while micro-organisms are
those which are not visible but can be observed under microscope
8Sustainable Management of Soil Health
(ISBN: 978-93-88901-98-7)
Ants
Macroorganisms Rodents
Earthworms
Bacteria
Soil organisms
Fungi
Actimonycetes
Microorganisms Algae
Protozoa
Nematodes
Fig. 1: Diagrammatic representation for classification of microorganisms in soil
A relative study has shown that proportion/percentage of various soils micro-organism
can be briefly summarized as: aerobic bacteria (70%) and anaerobic bacteria (13%),
actinomycetes (13%), fungi (3%) while algae, protozoa and viruses constitute0.2-0.8%.
However, the main role of soil organisms is in nutrient transformation. It was recorded that one
gram of topsoil may comprise-of one billion bacteria which then can reach up to 100 million
actinomycetes, one million fungi and 100 nematodes.
Soil micro-organisms
Soil microorganisms are classified into different types viz. bacteria, fungi, actinomycetes,
algae, protozoa, nematodes, etc.
A. Bacteria
Bacteria are the smallest freely living prokaryotes and single-celled organisms. Typically,
the size of bacterial cells ranges from 0.5 to 1.0 μm in diameter. The majority of bacterial species
exist as single forms but some occur as filaments of loosely joint cells. Because of their small
size and general similarity of structure, the classification of bacteria usually depends on
physiologic and biochemical characters rather than the morphogenetic ones. They may be rod-
like bacilli, spherical cocci and spiral forms. Bacteria are microscopic single-celled organisms.
They are the most abundant microbes in the soil. Soil bacteria are involved in numerous
biogeochemical cycles and play a distinctive role in crop production. Soil rhizosphere contains
distinguishing types of bacteria that interact with plants and increase soil fertility and health.
Free- living bacteria beneficial also known as PGPR promotes plant growth (Hayat et al., 2010)
which has been reported in sugarcane crops (Kushwahaet al., 2020). So, plant growth promotion
(PGPR) mechanisms by bacterial endophytes are quite comparable to the activity of rhizospheric
bacteria. Since most of the PGPR bacteria were sequestered from stems, roots and soils. Those
PGPR bacteria belong to the genera of Enterobacter, Pseudomonas, Kleibsiella, Azospirillum,
Rhizobium, Rahnella, Delflia, Caulobacter, Xanthomonas, Achromobacter, Agrobacterium,
Burkholderia, Gluconacetobacyer, etc (Ghevariya and Desai, 2014).
9Bhumi Publishing, India
Even there are weak bacterial species that can be wiped off by slight alternation in the
soil setting. In retorting to variations in temperatures and soil moisture, bacterial populations can
shatter in just a few days. On the contrary, some of the bacteria can withstand a wide range of
variability such as severe heat, cold, or drying. Moreover, there are some bacterial species that
are plant-specific dependent.
Bacterial classification
Bacteria species can be categorized into four groups as follows:
1. Decomposers:
Decomposers are those bacteria present in the soil that eat dead and decaying plant
residues, organic matter and waste which then release nutrients that are needed by living
organisms. They are the essential component for various life forms in the early stages of most of
the nutrient cycles whether nitrogen, carbon, or sulphur cycles. Even some of the decomposers
can break down pesticides and hazardous pollutants present in the soil and the surrounding
environment. These decomposers play a special role in immobilizing nutrients in their cells, thus
inhibiting nutrient loss from the root zone such as nitrogen.
Nitrogen fixers
Bacteria
Nitrifiers Denitrifiers
Fig. 2: Classification of different mutualist bacteria
1. Nitrogen fixer bacteria: These microorganisms convert nitrogen gas from the
atmosphere and convert it into a form that can be used by plants for their metabolic
activities. Visibleroot nodules are created when bacteria infect a growing root hair.
Through this association, the plant supplies carbon to the bacteria for their cycles, and the
bacteria which in turn convert nitrogen gas (N ) from the atmosphere into a usable form
2
for plant uptakes.
2. These nitrogen-fixing organisms are of different types. They include – Free-living
nitrogen-fixing organisms, associative symbiotic organisms and Symbiotic fixation
microorganisms. The free-living nitrogen-fixing microorganisms are again subdivided
into Aerobic bacteria which include Azotobacterchroccum fixed commonly in crops like
10Sustainable Management of Soil Health
(ISBN: 978-93-88901-98-7)
wheat, rice, cotton and sugarcane while anaerobic bacteria include Clostridium. The
associative symbiontbacteriaincludeAzospirillum which are associated with roots of
grasses inside roots symbiosis. It is used for sorghum and pearl millet. The symbiotic
fixation microorganisms include nodule-forming bacteria viz. Rhizobium is an aerobic
and heterotrophic bacteria that symbiotically fixed atmospheric nitrogen with the
presence of leghaemoglobin in nodules of legume roots. When leaves or roots from the
host plant decompose, soil nitrogen increases in the surrounding area.
3. Nitrifyingbacteria: This is the microbial conversion of ammonium (NH +) to nitrite
4
(NO -) then to nitrate (NO -) mediated by microbes known as nitrifiers which is a
2 3
preferred form of nitrogen for grasses and most row crops. At first, ammonium undergoes
microbial oxidation by Nitrosomonas and is converted into nitrite (NO -) which is then
2
converted into nitrate (NO -) by Nitrobacter. Nitrifying bacteria required an optimum
3
temperature of 30 to 35˚C with an optimum pH of 6.5 to 7.5. However, nitrate can be
leached easily from the soil, so some farmers prefer to use nitrification inhibitors instead
of conventional fertilizers to reduce the activity of one type of nitrifying bacteria.
Nitrifying bacteria are suppressed in forest soils so that most of the nitrogen remains as
ammonium.
4. Denitrifying bacteria: Denitrifying bacteria are anaerobic micro-organisms that are
active when oxygen is absent, such as in saturated soils. These are the micro-organisms
that help in the formation of N or elemental nitrogen or loss of gaseous nitrogen form of
2
nitrogen by biological reduction of NO - and NO -. They convert nitrate to nitrogen (N )
3 2 2
or nitrous oxide (N O) gas. Denitrifying bacteria include Pseudomonas and Bacillus.
2
Role of bacteria in soil:
Bacteria play a crucial role in the agricultural perspective as most of the soil needs an
optimum population of soil bacteria to maintain and perform most of the plant's morphological
functions. It also regulates soil equilibrium for crop growth as they contribute to the carbon cycle
through fixation and decomposition, mineralization of nitrogen through various microbial
bacteria, denitrification of the nitrogen under saturated conditions. Many types of beneficial
bacteria are important for agricultural prospects, e.g., Rhizobium, Azospirillum, Azotobacter,
Pseudomonas, Bacillus and Clostridium.
Biochemical process of bacteria
Some of the brief biochemical mechanism upheld by bacteria includes-
a) Nitrogen fixers (Nitrobactersp.)
b) Degradation of sulphur (sulphur degradation and hydrocarbon degradation) by
Thiobacillusferroxodans, DesulphovibrioandDesulphomaculatum
c) Used for remediation (Pseudomonas sp.)
B. Fungi
The fungi constitute a large and diverse group of plant kingdoms. They are eukaryotic,
plantlike, spore-bearing organisms that lack chlorophyll and other photosynthetic pigments.
Consequently, they depend on the other organisms for their nutrition. They have a network of
11Bhumi Publishing, India
branched filament structures called hyphae and the tangled mass of hyphae is the mycelium. The
fungi secreted enzymes that act on starch, cellulose, pectin, lignin, sugars, etc. The enzyme
includes amylase, cellulose, pectinase, ligninase, invertase, maltase, etc. Fungi also have a cell
wall composed of chitin and glucans.
Fungi in soils
Fungi are well-established soil residents, because of their wide flexibility and adaptability
to various environments in response to hostile conditions (Singh et al., 2023). Due to Their
different ability to exudate extracellular enzymes results in aggravating different types of organic
matter, components of soil decomposers and thereby amending carbon and nutrients balance
(Žifˇcáková et al., 2016). The dead and decayed organic matter is converted into biomass, carbon
dioxide, and organic acids by fungi. In addition to this, numerous fungi species have the
capability to bio-sorbstoxic metals viz. zinc, mercury, copper, and cadmium (Frac et al., 2018)
that might affect their reproduction and inhibit their growth (Baldrian, 2003). The activity and
fungi miscellany is measured by various plants and other living organisms(biotic), soil pH,
structure, moisture, salinity and temperature (abiotic factors) (Rouphael et al., 2015).
Fungi can be established in almost every environment and can survive in a wide range of
pH and soil temperature. Soil fungi can be categorized into three efficient groups as follows:
(1) biological controllers
(2) ecosystem regulators and
(3) species participating in organic matter decomposition and compound transformations (Gardi
and Jeffery, 2009).
Biological
Controllers
Ecosystem
regulators
OM
decomposers&
transformers
Fig. 3: Diagrammatic representation of fungal classification in soil
Among the different fungi classes, biological controllers are those that can regulate pest,
diseases, and the growth of disease incidence in other living organisms (Bagyaraj and Ashwin,
2017). In support of the above criteria, it was found that mycorrhizal fungi mend plant growth
12Sustainable Management of Soil Health
(ISBN: 978-93-88901-98-7)
and development by enhancing nutrient uptakes and fortification against pathogens (Bagyaraj
and Ashwin, 2017). The ecosystem regulators are accountable for the formation of soil structure
and modification of other organism habitats thereby amending the physiological dynamics in the
soil environment
Role of fungi in soil
➢ Fungi also contribute to the fixation of nitrogen, production of bio control agents against
root pathogens, hormone production and drought protection (El-Komy et al., 2015). They
also play an important role in the decomposition of residues and stabilization of soil
organic matter (Treseder and Lennon, 2015) and release of nutrients from soil minerals.
Saprotrophic fungi also play a precarious role in the carbon cycle.
➢ They also help trap nematodes that are harmful to plants through the production of plant
hormones which may be harmful to nematodes.
➢ Since fungi dominate the soil biomass production, they also help in root water and
nutrient uptake through Mycorrhizae - which live in or on plant roots.
➢ Fungi also produce hormones and antibiotics that help plant growth and prevent diseases
which benefit them by taking in the nutrients from the roots they live in.
➢ Saprotrophic fungi are also involved in the global carbon cycle. Arbuscular Mycorrhiza
(AM) and Ecto Mycorrhizal (EM) fungi form symbioses with the prevalent host plants.
Even lichens show symbiotic associations between a fungus and green algae which are
bipartite symbiosis, and even with cyanobacteria of tripartite symbiosis.
Biodiversity of fungus population in soils and its impact on soil health status for
agricultural and horticultural crops
Fungi play an important role in plant defense against pathogenic microorganisms. It also
acts as a biological agent, which influences soil health. It also contributes in decomposition of
organic matter and provides nutrients for plant growth (Frac et al., 2015). The assessment of
fungal biodiversity involves determination of biodiversity indexes and structure analysis of
fungal population. It helps in determination of the functions aspects fungi play in affecting soil
quality and plant health as quality indicators. Application of dissimilar types of organic manure
has a significant impact on soil health, through direct and indirect effects (i.e. via
physicochemical alternation) on soil fungal communities present in soil. Some of the agronomic
and cultural practices, such as the use of cover and rotational crops, mulching, strip cropping,
composts and tillage practices are expected to affect the other groups of soil fungi, exclusively
beneficial micro-fungal populations (Abawi and Widmer, 2000).
It has been observed that reduced tillage operation might decrease the breakdown of
hyphae creating stable fungal populations, recollecting more nutrients and providing more rigid
effects against pathogenic microorganisms (Gross and deVarennes,2002). It should be
considered that fungal diversity determines ecosystem variability, plant biodiversity and crop
productivity (Wagg et al., 2014). Among the different fungal populations, arbuscular
mycorrhizal fungi also known as (AMF) are the most important beneficial microorganisms in
agricultural and horticultural aspects (Smith and Read, 2008).
13Bhumi Publishing, India
The significant effects of arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi (AMF) symbiosis include:
stimulation of nutrient cycles, improvement of plant rooting and their establishment,
enhancement of soil structure, augmented uptake of less mobileions, boost plant tolerance to
stresses, and enrichment of plant diversity (Azcón-Aguilar and Barea, 1997). In the case of
disease control systems, most of the diseases of crop plants can be controlled by some
antagonistic fungi such as Glomus sp. or Trichoderma sp. suppressing fungal pathogens
(Dawidziuk et al., 2016). Species of Trichoderma viz. Trichoderma asperellum, Trichoderma
atroviride, Trichoderma harzianum, Trichoderma virens, and Trichoderma viride are frequently
used a biocontrol agents and are known as horticultural bio stimulants (López-Bucio et al.,
2015). Even De Connick et al., 2015 reported synergistic impact of Arbuscular Micorrhizal
Fungi (AMFs) and Plant Growth Promoting Rhizobium (PGPRs) on growth of horticultural plant
and microbial diversity of soil.
C. Actinomycetes
Actinomycetes are microorganisms that belong to order Actinomycetes which are gram-
positive and aerobic. They are known for their substrate and floating mycelium production. They
belong to bacterial kingdom but share some features with fungi such as shape and branching
properties, reproductive spore formation and production of metabolites. Actinomycetes form
filaments which are thread-like in the soil. They exhibit a distinctive scent from freshly exposed
moist soil that results from metabolic release of the nutrients. They also fix nitrogen in the soils
which are then made available near vicinity of host and other plants through formation of
associations with non-leguminous plants. Actinomycetes show optimal growth in alkaline pH.
Actinomycetes are known for decomposing the more resistant organic substances, such as
polysaccharides, cellulose, fats, organic acid and protein. They are vibrant in breaking down
different sources of humic acids in soils to form stable humus which then improve soil structure
and upsurge soilwater retention capacity. Actinomycetes are those micro-organisms that exhibit
freshly moist soil and its distinguishing “earthy” odour.
Role of Actinomycetes in soil
The rhizosphere of crop plants and enhances soil fertility and their health through
solubilizing phosphate and salvaging organic matter. They form associations with non-
leguminous plants and fix nitrogen, which is then available in close vicinity of the host and other
plants.
D. Algae
Algae are defined as a large collection of photosynthetic, eukaryotic organisms. They are
of varied groups of simple, usually autotrophic organisms. Algae can make their own nutrient
through a process known as photosynthesis which converts light energy to chemical energy that
can be stored as nutrients. For algae to grow, they must be exposed to light because
photosynthesis requires light, so algae are typically distributed evenly wherever sunlight and
moderate moisture is available. Reproduction in algae occurs in both asexual and sexual forms.
Asexual reproduction occurs by spore formation. Algae do not need direct exposure to sunlight
but can live below the soil surface under uniform temperature and moisture conditions. Algae are
also capable of performing nitrogen fixation.
14Sustainable Management of Soil Health
(ISBN: 978-93-88901-98-7)
Types of algae
Algae can be divided into three groups as follows: the Cyanophyceae, the Chlorophyceae
and the Bacillariaceae (Masbau and Ayindi, 2021). The Cyanophyceae also known as blue-green
algae are chlorophyll-containing algae that absorb sunlight and uses that energy to synthesize
carbohydrates from carbon dioxide and water. The Chlorophyceae usually have green colour
pigment also known as chlorophyll and the Bacillariaceae contain chlorophyll and other
pigments such as algal brown colour pigment. Cyanophyceae (Blue-green algae) are responsible
for nitrogen fixation that depends on environmental and physiological factors. They include
sunlight intensity, inorganic and organic nitrogen concentration, favorable temperature and soil
stability.
Role of algae in soil
Algae also play a significant role in the soil. They are considered bio-fertilizers. They
also help maintain the fertility of soil in tropical regions. Besides its role in controlling soil
erosion, algae aid to recover the water potential in soils.
E. Protozoa
Protozoa are single-celled, eukaryotic microorganisms. They are grander than bacteria
which differ from a few microns to millimetres and reproduce sexually with a unique
evolutionary step from reduplication of spores. Protozoa can be classified into three categories
viz. flagellates, amoebae and ciliates (Masbau and Ayindi, 2021).
a. Flagellates
Flagellates are non-chlorophyll-containing protozoa that are not capable of performing
photosynthesis due to a lack of chlorophyll. They occur mostly in the soil. However, the
chlorophyll-containing flagellates normally occur in aquatic environments. The chlorophyll-
containing protozoa can be illustrated by their flagella, which are their locomotor organs (Stuart
and Chapin, 2002). Some of the protozoa species bear numerous flagella, while the others only
have a similitude of appendage.
b. Amoebae
Amoebae are protozoan classes that are bigger than flagellates with different locomotors
mechanisms. They possess pseudopodia or ‘false foot’ which is a distinguishing feature of
amoeba from the rest of the protozoan species. The pseudopodia are more of a slime-like
dependability than a flagellum (Stuart and Chapin, 2002). It helps in the movement of food.
However, amoeba bears temporary appendages.
c. Ciliates
Ciliates are the largest protozoa group which locomote through cilia, a short and
numerous structures. They produce whipping reactions and resemble small and short hairs. Cilia
can move in different directions, enhancing its mobility more than flagellates or amoebae (Stuart
and Chapin, 2002).
Role of protozoa in soil
It is quite evident that the role of protozoan in regulating soil health is not that significant.
However, more or less the yard sustains soil microbial equilibrium by feeding on bacteria. They
grow profusely in surface soil. They are also found to employ in controlling diseases against
15Bhumi Publishing, India
various pathogenic species as biological control agents. Protozoa population in arable soil ranges
from 10,000 to 100,000 per gram of soil.
F. Nematodes
Nematodes are tiny filiform roundworms also known as roundworms. They are phyto-
parasites and reside at the surface of the living roots. These free-living nematodes feed on
bacteria and fungi thereby control harmful microbial populations. They are bilaterally
symmetrical and elongate with tapering ends. Nematodes range in size from microscopic to 7
meters. The average nematodes vary in size range of 0.15-5 mm long and 2-100 mm except
mermithidae nematodes (20 cm) long commonly found in tropical soils (Musbau and Ayinde,
2021). The population of nematode species is about 20,000. Nematodes can only move through a
film of soil moisture that surrounds the soil particles. Nematodes act as hydrobiont that fills
spaces between soil particles and roots covers. They enter a dormant stage in hot and dry
conditions. When the monsoons proceed, they return back to activity.
Nematodes are documented as key microbial feeder in soils. They are mostly assembled
into four to five trophic classes based on their food habit, oesophagus and stomata structure and
nutritional mechanism (Kiflu and Beyene, 2013): as bacterial feeders, fungal feeders, predatory
feeders, omnivores, and plant feeders. The bacterial feeder’s feed on bacteria i.e., bacterivores
which can invest up to 5000 cells/minute or 6.5 times their own weight daily. These activities
help both the organic matter and the decomposers to disperse in the soil. Fungal and bacterial-
feeding nematodes release a substantial amount of nitrogen while feeding on their prey and are
accountable for most of the plant available nitrogen in the soils (Grayston et al., 2004). The
overall annual nematodes consumption may reach up to 800 kg of bacteria per hectare while the
nitrogen turned over may be as high as 20-130 kg (Kiflu and Beyene, 2013). However,
phytophagous nematodes impair plant roots which might affect economic returns in the future.
They also possess a wide range of sizes and structure of styles. In fact, phytophagous nematodes
are the most extensively studied group of soil nematodes. However, they hamper crop yield due
to their pathogenic effect.
Role of nematod