International Research Journal of Engineering and Technology (IRJET) e-ISSN: 2395 -0056
Volume: 04 Issue: 03 | Mar -2017 www.irjet.net p-ISSN: 2395-0072
Real Time soil fertility analyzer and crop prediction
Dharesh Vadalia1, Minal Vaity2, Krutika Tawate3 , Dynaneshwar Kapse4
1 Student VIII SEM, B.E., Computer Engg. , RGIT, Mumbai, India
2 Student VIII SEM, B.E., Computer Engg. , RGIT, Mumbai, India
3 Student VIII SEM, B.E., Computer Engg. , RGIT, Mumbai, India
4 Assistant Professor, Department of Computers, RGIT, Mumbai, India
---------------------------------------------------------------------***---------------------------------------------------------------------
Abstract - With evolution in technology various nutrient use efficiency, are often overlooked.
agricultural practices have shifted from traditional In Automated farming practice we intend to reduce human
techniques to automated techniques like field irrigation errors by monitoring the soil quality using various soil
system. Many such agricultural parameters are being sensor via smartphones and webserver. The key feature of
monitored remotely to improve quality of farming. One of our system is to determine suitable crops for current state
the most important parameter in farming is soil fertility i.e. of soil. By calculating nutrient content in soil.
ratio in which various nutrient essential for crop is present
in soil. To monitor soil fertility, pH of the soil is most 2. LITERATURE REVIEW
commonly measured. It is also one of the most useful and Paper1: S.Sivachandran, K.Balakrishnan, K.Navin [1]
informative soil parameters because of its relationship to
In this paper Embedded Based Soil Analyzer is used to
many aspects of soil fertility and plant growth. Despite its
analyze various soil nutrients with the help of pH value. As
importance, the implications of inadequate soil pH on
per the availability of nutrients, recommendations of
forage response, particularly nutrient use efficiency, are
often overlooked. In the proposed system we determine the cultivating the particular crop will be given. This project
average percentage of basic soil nutrients Nitrogen, uses microcontroller which determines PH of diluted soil
Phosphorous and Potassium and determine the suitable sample using Glass ph electrode. PH is defined as the
crops for the particular soil type. The system will analyze negative logarithm (base 10) of the activity of hydronium
soil nutrient content at real time and make crop prediction.
ions (H+or, more precisely, H3O+aq) in a solution. It
System will be built on Arduino. System will also suggest the
ranges from 0 to 14, with 7 being neutral. A pH below 7 is
crops on basis determined PH of soil.
acidic and above 7 is basic. The optimum pH range for
most plants is between 5.5 and 7.0. The system includes
Key Words: PH, Real time detection, Soil fertility, PH
meter, Crop prediction system. Microcontroller Unit, Signal conditioning, Sensors, Display,
Thermal Printer and Power supply. Output from pH
1. INTRODUCTION sensors and EC sensor are analog in nature to process
In India Conventional farming practice involves human these analog signals to the system A/D converters are
labors for performing all types of farming activities like used. PIC18F458 Microcontroller has the inbuilt analog to
watering fields, cultivating crops with required fertilizers digital converter and no need to connect the external A/D
etc. Soil analysis is a valuable tool for farmers; it converter for the system. In this system, keypad is used to
determines the inputs required for efficient and connect the user and the system.
economical production. A proper soil test will help to
ensure the application of enough fertilizer to meet the Paper 2: Apurva C. Pusatkar, Vijay S. Gulhane [2]
requirements of the crop while taking advantage of the In this paper, the advanced development in wireless
nutrients already present in the soil. It will also allow you sensor networks was used in monitoring various
parameters in agriculture. In this context, due to the
to determine lime requirements and can be used to
advancements in small-scale sensor devices with wireless
diagnose problem areas. Sampling technique is correct; as
technologies, one is able to remotely monitor humidity,
the results are only as good as the sample you take. Soil
temperature and moisture. In this paper it was proposed
testing is also a requirement for farms that must complete to implement a wireless sensor network connected with
a nutrient management plan. Major nutrients: Nitrogen centralized basic node using ZigBee, which was connected
(N), Phosphorus (P) and Potassium (K) Soil pH is the most to a Central Monitoring Station (CMS) through Global
System for Mobile (GSM) technologies or General Packet
commonly measured soil properties. It is also one of the
Radio Service (GPRS). The system acquires Global
most useful and informative soil parameters because of its
Positioning System (GPS) parameters related to the field
relationship to many aspects of soil fertility and plant
then transfers them to a central monitoring station. This
growth. Despite its importance, the implications of system was presumed to evaluate soil conditions and act
inadequate soil pH on forage response, particularly accordingly in order to help farmers. This system implies
© 2017, IRJET | Impact Factor value: 5.181 | ISO 9001:2008 Certified Journal | Page 1497International Research Journal of Engineering and Technology (IRJET) e-ISSN: 2395 -0056
Volume: 04 Issue: 03 | Mar -2017 www.irjet.net p-ISSN: 2395-0072
monitoring various factors such as humidity, soil moisture tests, which will include the averaged result of all the tests,
and provide remote monitoring using ZigBee which sends reflecting the ratio in which various nutrients i.e. Nitrogen,
data wirelessly to a central server which collects data
Phosphorous, Potassium are present in the soil. And will
store it and allow it to be displayed as needed and also be
also contain the list of suitable crop and the required
sent to the client mobile.
fertilizer for the land.
3. SYSTEM ANALYSIS
A. Problem Definition
Soil fertility changes with every harvest and changing
weather condition and also affects the nutrient content of
soil. Also fertility of soil varies at different part of field and
it requires to be monitored for healthy crop production.
To determine soil fertility PH of soil is determined using
PH electrodes, PH electrodes sense the soil alkalinity and
electrical conductivity. On basis of this sensed parameter
we determine the approximate percentage of basic NPK
(Nitrogen, Phosphorous, Potassium) nutrient contents
present in soil. Multiple observations will be taken from
various parts of land. The average of all the observation
taken from multiple part of land will give the soils state of
fertility. On basis of calculated fertility, system will
determine the suitable crops for the tested land and also
farmer will get an idea of what fertilizer is required.
B. Scope
Proposed system will determine the fertility of soil by Fig -1: Chart representing nutrient content in soil for
various PH readings
measuring basic parameter effecting soil fertility like PH
and electrical conductivity. This will help the farmer in
deciding, what crop to bow in the soil, based on the D. Soil Quality Analyzer And Crop Prediction System
measured nutrient contents present in soil at current Working:
state. It will also help in determining what fertilizer to use Arduino board along with analog to digital convertor is
for the crop. And amount of fertilizer required. used to process analog reading PH metal electrode.
Throughout the cultivation process of crop, farmer can Arduino UNO R3, power requirement is 9v [4], which will
test soil fertility n no. of times and take necessary steps to be powered using 9-volt adapter. The Ph electrode and EC
get a good yield. Farmer can maintain the record of his sensor will be connected to Arduino digital GPIO pins.
land fertility over the span of time and can access it Both sensor work in range of 3.3v – 5v power supply.
remotely from anywhere using a mobile device. Analog-Digital converter is used to convert anolog data
captured from PH electrode to digital value.
C. Proposed System
The objective of proposed system is to replace the
traditional farming technique of testing soil fertility by the
automated remotely monitored fertility monitoring
technique. In this system the farmer gets current status of
soil fertility in his land at real time. The soil quality is
determined by using the sensors to calculate the soil
nutrient contents i.e. nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium
(NPK). The farmer tests multiple sample of soil in his land
using a portable device. Result of each test is averaged to
determine the approximate fertility of total land. Result of
all the tests will be displayed on dsplay screen. The farmer
phisically enters the diplayed value in his mobile
application to get a digitally generated soil fertility e- Fig -2: Block diagram of Soil Quality Analyzer And Crop
report. A digital report generated on the basis of all the Prediction System
© 2017, IRJET | Impact Factor value: 5.181 | ISO 9001:2008 Certified Journal | Page 1498International Research Journal of Engineering and Technology (IRJET) e-ISSN: 2395 -0056
Volume: 04 Issue: 03 | Mar -2017 www.irjet.net p-ISSN: 2395-0072
Ph electrode used to measure the Ph value is a solid metal crop for the land. The advantage of this project is it skips
electrode which works on principal of, current flowing lab-testing process and determines soil fertility in real
between two semiconductor electrodes (drain and source) time. The proposed model for testing soil fertility is cheap
which is controlled by the electrostatic field generated by and easy to use and maintain.
the protonated third electrode (gate), which is placed
between drain and source. Ion Selective Field Effect
REFERENCES
Transistors [7] are used measure current flow.
[1] Real Time Embedded Based Soil Analyzer.
International Research Journal of Engineering and
Technology (IRJET). Volume: 3 Issue 3 | March 2014
[2] Implementation of Wireless Sensor Network for Real
Time Monitoring of Agriculture. International research
journal of engineering and technology (IRJET). Volume: 03
issue: 05 | may-2016
[3] Automated Soil Testing Device. ITSI Transactions on
Electrical and Electronics Engineering (ITSI-TEEE). 2320 –
8945, Volume: 1 Issue -5 | 2013
[4] https://www.arduino.cc/en/Main/ArduinoBoardUno
[5] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ESP8266
[6] https://www.agriculturesolutions.com/resources/92-
the-why-and-how-to-testing-the-electrical-conductivity-
of-soils
[7]https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3291
948/
[8]https://www.teachengineering.org/activities/view/ny
Fig -3: Working of PH metal electrode u_probe_activity1
[9] http://soilquality.org
Electrical conductivity is measured using an EC sensor.
The sensor consists of two metal electrodes and a constant
voltage is applied across the electrodes resulting in an
electrical current flowing through the sample. Since the
current flowing through the soil is proportional to the
concentration of ions in the soil. The higher the ion
concentration, more conductive the sample will be and
hence the higher the conductivity reading. The unit of
measurement for Electrical Conductivity is microSiemens
per centimeter (µS/cm)[6]. 1000 microsiemans is equal to
1 millisieman (1MS/cm). Arduino UNO R3 will process the
data sensed by the sensor and convert it into user
understandable reading. This processed data will calculate
the fertility of soil. The farmer can view digital report
generated basis on test reading on his mobile devices and
will also be able to view the list of all suitable crops for his
land.
4. CONCLUSIONS
In this project, a method for determining soil fertility by
considering Ph and electrical conductivity parameter is
presented. Ph is measured using Ph meter and electrical
conductivity is measured using EC sensor. The reading of
Ph meter gives the approximate ratio of various nutrient
content present in soil and in what proportion. This
approximation of soil nutrient will determine the suitable
© 2017, IRJET | Impact Factor value: 5.181 | ISO 9001:2008 Certified Journal | Page 1499