NFSM – COMMERCIAL CROPS
OPERATIONAL GUIDELINES
th
(12 Five Year Plan)
Department of Agriculture & Cooperation
Ministry of Agriculture
Government of India
Krishi Bhawan, New Delhi-110001
1CONTENTS
Sr. No: Particulars Page No.
1 Introduction 1
2 Implementing Agencies 1
3 Fund flow mechanism 1
4 Role of Panchayati Raj Institutions 2
5 Reporting 2
6 Monitoring mechanism 2
7 Evaluation 2
8 Components of NFSM Commercial Crops 3
9 Contingencies & Electronic Print Media 3
10 Cotton Crop Based Cropping Systems. 4
10.1 Insecticide Resistance Management (IRM) 4
10.2 On Line Pest Monitoring and Advisory Services (OPMAS) 5
10.3 Front Line Demonstration (FLD) 5
10.4 Trials on High Density Planting System (HDPS) 5
11 Jute crop Based Cropping Systems 6
11.1 Jute Seed Production 7
11.2 Production of seed through seed village programme & 7
Government farm
11.3 FLDs on alternate retting technologies 8
11.4 FLDs on Production technology 8
11.5 National / State Level Training 8
12 Sugarcane crop Based Cropping Systems 9
12.1 Demonstration on Intercropping with Sugarcane 9
12.2 Assistance for Breeder Seed Production 10
12.3 Production of tissue culture raised plantlets/seedlings 10
12.4 Strengthening/Establishment of tissue culture and Bio-agent 10
laboratories
12.5 National / State Level Training 11
2List of Annexure
Annexure No Subject Page No.
I Commercial crop based cropping system linked 12
with food crops
II Quarterly Progress Report of FLDs on 13
Cotton/Jute/Sugarcane.
Quarterly Progress Report on HDPS trials on 13
Cotton
II (a) Annual Progress Report of FLDs 14
III Quarterly Progress Report of Insecticide 15
Resistance
Management (IRM) under cotton
III (a) Annual Progress Report of IRM under cotton 16
IV Quarterly Progress Report of OPMAS under cotton 17
IV (a) Annual Progress Report of OPMAS under cotton 18
V Quarterly / Annual Progress Report of Jute Seed 19
production programme
VI Quarterly / Annual Progress Report of National / 19
State Level Training Programme
VII Quarterly/Annual Progress Report of Bio-agent 20
lab / Tissue Culture lab
VIII Components and Pattern of Assistance under 21-22
NFSM- Commercial Crops during 12th Plan Period
3ABBREVIATION
CCI COTTON CORPORATION OF INDIA
CDDs CROP DEVELOPMENT DIRECTORATE
CICR CENTRAL INSTITUTE OF COTTON RESEARCH
CRIJAF CENTRAL RESEACH INSITUTE OF JUTE AND ALLIED FIBRES
DAC DEPARTMENT OF AGRICUTLURE & COOPERATION
DOCD DIRECTORATE OF COTTON DEVELOPMENT
DOJD DIRECTORATE OF JUTE DEVELOPMENT
DOSD DIRECTORATE OF SUGARCANE DEVELOPMENT
ELS EXTRA LONG STAPLE
FLDs FRONT LINT DEMONSTRATIONS
HDPS HIGH DENSITY PLANTING SYSTEMS
ICAR INDIAN COUNCIL OF AGRICULTURE RESEARCH
IISR INDIAN INSTITUTE OF SUGARCANE RESEARCH
INM INTEGRATED NUTRIENT MANAGEMENT
IPM INSECTICIDE PEST MANAGEMENT
IRM INSECTICIDE RESISTANCE MANAGEMENT
KVKs KRISHI VIGYAN KENDRAS
NALMOT NATIONAL LEVEL MONITORING TEAM
NCIPM NATIONAL CENTRE FOR INTEGRATED PEST MANAGEMENT
NFSM NATIONAL FOOD SECURITY MISSION
NGOs NON GOVERNMENT ORGANISATION
NIRJAFT NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF RESEARCH ON JUTE & ALLIED FIBRE
TECHNOLOGY
NSC NATIONAL SEEDS CORPORATION LIMITED
OPMAS ON LINE PEST MONITORING AND ADVISORY SERVICES
SAUs STATE AGRICULTUE UNIVERSITIES
SBI SUGARCANE BREEDING INSTITUTE
SDA STATE DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
SFCI STATE FARM CORPORATION OF INDIA
SSC STATE SEED CORPORATION
SSCA STATE SEED CERTIFICATION AGENCY
UPCSR UTTAR PRADESH COUNCIL OF SUGARCANE RESEARCH
VSI VASANT DADA SUGAR INSTITUTE
4NFSM-Commercial Crops
Operational Guidelines
********
1. Introduction
Cotton, Jute and Sugarcane are amongst the main cash crops of India. These
crops are grown in food crops sequences in different agro- climatic conditions.
In the 12th Five Year Plan, under the NFSM, cropping system approach is being
adopted by including commercial crops like cotton, jute and sugarcane to meet the
demand for both food & cash crops. This would be possible through proper crop rotation,
multiple cropping systems, intercropping etc. The commercial crop based cropping
system linked with food crops are given in Annexure-I.
2. Implementing agencies
NFSM-commercial crops (cotton, jute, sugarcane) will be implemented by
Department of Agriculture & Cooperation through Directorate of Cotton Development,
Mumbai, Directorate of Jute Development, Kolkata and Directorate of Sugarcane
Development, Lucknow. The respective Crop Development Directorate (CDD) will
formulate annual action plan in consultation with various implementing agencies and
will act as nodal office of respective commercial crop. The CDD will be responsible for
monitoring and evaluation of the crop specific programme.
The programme will be implemented in all major cotton, jute and sugarcane
growing states. Other non-traditional states may also be covered on basis of their
potential. Beside States, ICAR, Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs), State Agriculture
Universities (SAUs), Cooperatives, NGOs, etc. will implement the activities of NFSM-
commercial crops. The CDDs will involve Cooperatives/NGOs on the basis of the
recommendations of the State Government. The State Department of Agriculture (SDA)
shall to monitor and inspect the activities undertaken by other implementing agencies in
the state.
53. Fund flow mechanism
All the components of the NFSM-commercial crops will be 100% funded. The
funds will be released by DAC, Ministry of Agriculture to the respective implementing
agencies like SDA, Cane Commissioner, ICAR, SAUs, CDDs etc. with the approval of
NFSMEC. The implementing agencies will submit utilization certificate to the
respective CDDs who will forward the same to DAC, Ministry of Agriculture, Govt. of India
for further release of fund. As far as possible, electronic banking / RTGS will be used for
transfer of funds to the agencies.
4. Role of Panchayati Raj Institutions
Panchayati Raj Institutions will be actively involved in the selection of beneficiaries,
identification of priority areas of commercial crops based cropping system.
5. Reporting
The implementing agencies will submit Quarterly Progress Reports (QPRs) by
the 15th of the month following each quarter and the detailed Annual Progress Report
(APR) latest by 30th April in prescribed format given in Annexure-II, II (a) III, III (a) ,
IV, IV (a) , V, VI and VII to Additional Commissioner (Crops), DAC and respective
CDD.
6. Monitoring mechanism
The National Level Monitoring Team (NALMOT) will be constituted to monitor
the activities of NFSM-commercial crops in various states. Respective CDD will meet
the expenses of NALMOT.
7. Evaluation:
I. A baseline survey will be conducted to know the resource endowments of the
farmers and the level of crop productivity.
II. Concurrent Evaluation will be done every year to assess the performance of
the programme commensurate with annual action plan and its objectives.
III. Impact Evaluation Study at the National Level will also be undertaken through an
independent agency after the third year of implementation to assess the impact of
6various interventions in increasing the productivity of cotton, jute and sugarcane
and enhancement of farmers' income.
IV. Respective CDD will meet the expenses of evaluation of NFSM-commercial
crops programme.
8. Components of NFSM-commercial crops
Front Line Demonstrations (FLDs) of various commercial crops including inter-crops
will be conducted by various institutions. Besides, national/state level training, seed
production programme will be assisted in case of jute and sugarcane. Insecticide Resistant
Management (IRM) and Online Pest Monitoring and Advisory Services (OPMAS)
programme on Bt-cotton will be continued and supported through ICAR institutions.
Strengthening of bio-agent production units and tissue culture laboratories for sugarcane
will be undertaken. The various technological interventions for commercial crops to be
under taken as under:-
Cotton Jute Sugarcane
Insecticide Resistance Jute Seed Production FLDs on Intercrops with
Management (IRM) sugarcane / FLDs on single
bud chip technology of
sugarcane
On line Pest Monitoring and FLDs on alternative Assistance for Breeder Seed
Advisory Services retting technologies Production
(OPMAS)
i) FLDs on Integrated Crop (i) FLDs on production Assistance for production
Management (ICM) technologies / FLDs on of tissue culture plantlets
ii) FLDs on Desi and Extra jute with pulses as Strengthening /
Long Staple (ELS) Cotton intercrop establishment of tissue
/FLDs on ELS cotton seed culture laboratory /Bio –
production . agent production unit.
iii) FLDs on Inter-cropping National level training National level training
Trials on High Density State level training State level training
Planting System (HDPS)
Monitoring, evaluation & Monitoring, evaluation & Monitoring, evaluation &
electronic print media electronic print media electronic print media
79. Contingencies & Electronic Print Media.
The cost for the preparation of literature, consultancy services, evaluation, need based
studies, workshops, foreign visit, seminars etc., will be met under this component.
Besides, making audio / video material for NFSM-commercial crops, preparation of
software, state level seminar may also be organized by the implementing agencies
inviting farmers / extension workers / dealers / NGOs / KVKs/ Cooperatives / Farmers
Association etc. The allocation per year for each CDD is given in annexure-VIII.
The detail of various components of individual commercial crop based cropping
system is as given.
10. Cotton Crop Based Cropping Systems.
Cotton is cultivated under different cropping system i.e. mono-cropping, mixed
cropping, relay cropping, inter cropping and rotation or sequence cropping in the country.
The common traditional practice adopted in cultivation of cotton in central and south
India is strip cropping i.e. 1 or 2 rows of pigeon pea, 3-5 rows of finger millet (ragi) or
after every 8-10 rows of cotton. There is vast scope of cultivation of various crops as
inter crop with cotton due to its slow initial growth and long duration. The programme
will be implemented in 13 states namely Haryana, Punjab, Rajasthan, Gujarat, Madhya
Pradesh, Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh, Orissa, Karnataka, Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal,
Tripura and Tamil Nadu. The component wise details under cotton crop based cropping
system are given below:
10.1 Insecticide Resistance Management (IRM)
IRM module of Bt-cotton hybrids will be implemented by CICR, Nagpur through
22 participating centers of SAUs, ICAR and recognized agriculture organization in
collaboration with SDA to maintain the resistance management. The module will be
replicated in 50 districts of 10 states covering more than 1.0 lakh farmers per year which
may vary in future depending on pest situation. The IRM strategies will be disseminated
in 20 villages in each district with the help of unemployed youth having Agriculture
Diploma / B.Sc. (Agriculture)/M.Sc. (Agriculture), skilled helpers and field workers.
Funds will be provided in each district for remuneration/honorarium of manpower (one
project officer, one helper and twenty field workers for six months), monitoring, training
8of field workers, conveyance / travel allowance and other contingencies. An assistance
@ Rs. 4.5 lakh / district + administrative cost will be provided to CICR, Nagpur. CICR
Nagpur will circulate guidelines and modules for each activity with financial ceiling to
the participating centers.
10.2 On Line Pest Monitoring and Advisory Services (OPMAS)
OPMAS will provide web based pest monitoring and advisory services about the
emerging pests, diseases and any other significant problem with cotton crop and will be
implemented by NCIPM, New Delhi. The programme will be implemented in 30
districts of 9 states covering 15,000 farmers in a year through 16 centers of SAU, ICAR
and KVKs. Resistance monitoring in pink bollworm population, validation and
demonstration of grey mildew and leaf reddening management strategies, dissemination
of IPM strategies, popularization the safe use of light traps etc will be main activities of
OPMAS. An assistance @ Rs. 4.5 lakh / district + administrative cost will be provided.
NCIPM, New Delhi will circulate guidelines and modules for each activity with financial
ceiling to the participating centers.
10.3 Front Line Demonstration (FLDs)
Three types of FLDs on cotton namely (i) FLDs on Integrated Crop Management
(ICM) including Integrated Nutrient Management (INM), Integrated Pest Management
(IPM), soil & water management / improved agronomic practices, (ii) FLDs on Desi &
Extra Long Staple (ELS) cotton / FLDs on ELS Cotton seed production and (iii) FLDs on
intercropping will be organized / conducted through SDA, ICAR, SAU, KVK, NGO and
Cooperatives. DOCD will also involve reputed NGOs as per recommendations of State
Government to conduct FLDs on cotton. FLDs will be organized in clusters of at least 10
hectares. For each farmer at least 0.4 hectare area will be included in a demonstration.
10.4 Trials on High Density Planting System (HDPS).
HDPS of cotton is promoted to obtain high yields with straight varieties across the
world. The planting geometry of 8-10 cm distance between plants and row to row
distance at 30, 45, 75 and 90 cm is being followed under HDPS.
9HDPS of Cotton is relevant to India especially in the rainfed conditions. Early
maturing compact plant types with shorter sympodia suitable for HDPS have been
identified by CICR, Nagpur. HDPS trials will be conducted by CICR, Nagpur through
SDA, SAUs, KVKs, and Cooperatives. The HDPS trials will be conducted to validate
agronomic practices for rain-fed agro-eco regions of 10 cotton growing states (Haryana,
Punjab, Rajasthan, Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh, Odisha,
Karnataka and Tamil Nadu) to improve and sustain cotton yields on marginal soils.
The pattern of assistance under different types of FLDs given as under:
Type of FLDs Critical inputs Contingencies Total Assistance
(Rs.) (Rs.) (Rs./ha)
FLDs on ICM 6000 1000 7000
FLDs on Desi and ELS cotton 7000 1000 8000
/ELS Cotton seed production
FLDs on Intercropping 6000 1000 7000
Trials on HDPS 8000 1000 9000
The critical inputs for FLD includes costs of seed (non-Bt), fertilizer, micronutrients,
bio-pesticides, seeds of inter-crops, pheromone traps/light traps etc. A part of FLD funds is
earmarked as contingencies for field days, publicity materials, POL, visit of scientists etc.
11. Jute Crop Based Cropping Systems
Jute can be grown successfully in the cropping sequence with food grain crops like rice, wheat and
pulses and also pulses as inter-crops with jute. Some of identified promising jute based sequences
under rainfed conditions are jute-lentil, jute-black gram, jute-black gram-wheat, jute-rice-toria and
pulses as intercrop with jute. Under irrigated conditions, the promising crop sequences identified
are jute-rice-potato, jute-rice-lentil/pea, jute-rice-wheat, jute-rice-mustard. By adoption of these
sequences, crop intensification and diversification has significantly increased in the jute growing
regions. The jute based cropping system will be implemented in 12 States namely Andhra Pradesh,
Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Meghalaya, Nagaland, Orissa, Tripura, Uttar Pradesh,
Maharashtra, Karnataka and West Bengal. The components of the jute crop based cropping system
and assistance are given below.
1011.1. Jute Seed Production.
The production programme of breeder, foundation and certified seeds will be
undertaken for varieties (not older than 10 years) to ensure availability of good quality seed in
time and at a reasonable price. The production of breeder, foundation and certified seeds of
jute & mesta will be taken up by different agencies like SDA, CRIJAF, NSC, SFCI, SAU,
SSC, ICAR, KVKs, HIL and farmers group. The pattern of assistance on production of seed
of jute / mesta / sunhemp is given in annexure-VIII.
The breeder seed production will be taken up by the ICAR Institutes and SAUs. The
institutes will submit a proposal for production of variety-wise breeder and foundation seed to
the Directorate of Jute Development, Kolkata.
The seed producing agencies will submit proposal to the Directorate of Jute Development,
Kolkata regarding the variety-wise quantum of production of foundation and certified seed
duly certified by the state seed certifying agency. The seed producing agencies will also
submit information regarding variety-wise source and year of obtaining breeder seed along
with item wise cost of production.
11.2 Production of seed through Seed Village programme & Government Farm.
The seed production programme through Seed Village programme and at
Government farm will be undertaken to ensure availability of quality seeds. The
implementing agencies will be SDA, SAUs, KVK, SSC, NSC, SFCI, HIL and SSCA. At
least 10 ha area should be covered in each Seed Village programme or Government farm. The
Seed production Programme should be taken up with the varieties not older than 10 years.
An assistance of Rs. 5500/- per quintal of Certified Seed produced would be admissible under
the component.
11.3 FLDs on alternate retting technologies.
Retting is the most important factor determining the quality of fibre. The whole
plant retting technology is being practiced in India for which large quantity of water is
required. CRIJAF has developed two new retting technologies, namely, mechano-microbial
retting and in-situ retting with microbial consortium and NIRJAFT has developed two
11technologies, namely, chemical retting and dry retting. In order to reduce the bulk of the crop
to be retted vis-à-vis the requirement of water, the concept of ribbon retting has been
advanced. Accordingly, FLDs on newly developed retting technologies will be undertaken by
CRIJAF, NIRJAFT, SAUs, KVKs. An assistance of Rs.20000/- per FLDs will be provided
for an area of 0.25 ha 75% of the area for alternating retting technology and 25% for
traditional technologies and it will be reduced on pro-rata basis for actual size of FLD
conducted.
Item Amount (Rs.)
Material inputs, labour inputs, ribboner and such other 17000.00
materials required for organizing the demonstration
Monitoring, POL, visit of scientists, Field Day, meeting, 3000.00
publication etc.
Total 20000.00
11.4 FLDs on Production Technology / Intercropping
Production technology and intercropping demonstrations will be conducted on jute,
mesta, sunnhemp and ramie as recommended by ICAR/SAU and other Institutes. The
location specific improved technology on nutrient use efficiency, weed management, efficient
use of water, soil ameliorants, improved farm implements/machines etc. will be demonstrated
along with the newer varieties ( not older than 10 years). The assistance of Rs. 8000/- per ha
will be provided of which Rs. 1000/- will be for contingencies, field days, publicity materials,
POL, visit of scientists etc. FLDs will be organized in cluster of at least 10 hectares. For each
farmer at least 0.4 hectare area will be included in a demonstration.
11.5 National / State Level Training
The National Level Training Programme on production and retting technology of
jute / mesta / ramie / sun hemp including other related other aspects will be organised by the
CRIJAF, NIRJAFT, SAU and such other organizations. For a training of 25 participants from
SDA and NGOs associated in jute development activities, an assistance of Rs.80000 per
training (3 days) will be provided.
The State Level Training (2 days) will be organized by SAU, SDA, KVK and the
number of trainees will be 20 for which an assistance of Rs.40000 per training will be
provided. The item-wise break-up of national / state level training is given as below.
12Particulars Amount (in Rs.)
National Level State Level
1. Honorarium to Resource Person
@ Rs.750/-per lecture for national level for 15 11250 5000
lectures.
@ Rs.500/- per lecture for state Level for 10
lectures.
2. Refreshment for inaugural session for 50 persons 2500 2500
@ Rs. 50/- per head.
3. Boarding & lodging for trainees
@ Rs. 600/-per head per day for national level 45000 20000
@ Rs.500/- per head per day for state Level
4. Training Kit including publication
@ Rs. 500/-per trainee for national level 12500 8000
@ Rs.400/- per trainee for state Level
5.Contingencies including audio visual 8750 4500
arrangements, stationary , field visit etc.
Total 80000 40000
12. Sugarcane Based Cropping Systems
The sugarcane based cropping system will involve propagation of intercropping,
availability of quality planting material (tissue culture), strengthening of bio-agent and tissue
culture laboratories and capacity building. The programme will be implemented in 12 States
namely Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Gujarat, Haryana, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra,
Odisha, Punjab, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh & Uttarakhand. The interventions identified are as
under.
12.1 Demonstration on Intercropping with sugarcane:
The demonstration on pulses, oilseeds and cereals as intercrops with sugarcane will be
organized by SDA, Cane Commissioner, sugar factories, sugarcane research institutions,
NGOs, KVKs etc. as per the technologies recommended by ICAR, SAU, Sugar Institutes.
Assistance of Rs. 8000/- per demonstration (1.0 ha each) is provided of which Rs.1000/- will
be for contingencies, field days, publicity materials, POL, visit of scientists etc. Demonstration
will be organized in cluster of at least 10 hectares. For each farmer at least 0.4 hectare area
will be included in a demonstration. Demonstration on single bud chip technology may also
be emphasized where ever possible for which Rs. 8000/- per hectare will be provided low
order the cost of intercrops.
1312.2 Assistance for Breeder Seed Production.
Production of breeder seeds of varieties (not older than 15 years) will be taken up
through ICAR, SAUs, sugarcane research Institutes for which assistance limited to Rs.
40,000/- per ha will be provided. Out of which Rs. 6000/- will be contingencies for
preparation of report, record management, POL for visit of scientist, GOI officers & other
miscellaneous expenses.
12.3 Production of tissue culture raised plantlets/seedlings:
For faster and cheaper multiplication of the cane seed through tissue culture
technique, incentive for production of tissue culture raised plantlets/ seedlings will be provided
@ 50% of cost of seedlings limited to Rs. 3.5/-per seedling to sugarcane institutions and sugar
factories. The individual agencies will submit the claim to Director, DOSD, Lucknow after
duly authenticated by the respective State Government.
12.4 Strengthening/ Establishment of tissue culture and Bio-agent laboratories.
Sugarcane is vegetative propagated and huge quantity of cane seed is required for
planting of per unit area. Therefore, there is a need to enhance the seed multiplication through
establishment/ strengthening of tissue culture laboratories. For strengthening/establishment of
tissue culture laboratories at Sugarcane Research Institutes, ICAR, SAUs, sugar factories etc.,
an assistance of 50% of the cost of project limited to Rs. 75.00 Lakh will be provided.
In order to enhance the availability of bio-agents / bio-pesticides for biological control
of sugarcane pest, bio-agent laboratories will be established / strengthened at sugar
factory, sugarcane research institute, SAU/ ICAR @ 50% of the cost of project limited to Rs.
75.00 Lakh. The project of tissue culture & bio-agent laboratory includes cost of equipments,
furniture fixtures, green houses, consumable, glass wares, feeding stock etc. The component
will not support construction of building, recurring expenditure and salary of the staff.
12.5 National / State Level Training:
The national level trainings on crop production and protection aspects including
intercropping will be conducted by IISR, SBI, VSI, UPCSR etc. and state level trainings by
sugarcane research Institutes, sugarcane training centers of State Government, SAUs, KVKs
etc. The financial assistance for national level training of 2 days will be provided @ Rs.
1450000/- for 25 participants and Rs. 40000/- per state level training of 2 days for 20 participants.
The item wise break up of national/state level training is as under:
Particulars Amount (in Rs.)
National State
Level Level
1. Honorarium to Resource Person
@ Rs.750/-per lecture for National Level for 10 7500 5000
lectures.
@ Rs.500/- per lecture for State Level for 10
lectures.
2. Refreshment for inaugural session for 50 persons 2500 2500
@ Rs. 50/- per head.
3. Boarding & Lodging for trainees @ Rs.500/- per
head per day 25000 20000
4. Training Kit including publication @ Rs.400/-
trainee 10000 8000
5.Contingencies including audio visual 5000 4500
arrangements, field visit, etc.
TOTAL 50000 40000
The summery of Components and Pattern of Assistance under NFSM- Commercial
Crops
is given in Annexure VIII.
############################
15Annexure-I
Commercial crop based cropping system linked with food crops
1. Cotton
State Cropping Systems
Punjab, Haryana and Cotton-wheat, cotton-mustard
Rajasthan
Madhya Pradesh, Mono-cropped cotton, cotton-jowar (2 year rotation),
Maharashtra and Gujarat intercropping with blackgram, greengram, soybean, groundnut
and pigeonpea.
Andhra Pradesh Mono-cropped cotton, cotton-rice (sequence), cotton-jowar.
Tamil Nadu Mono-cropped cotton, rice-cotton, rice-rice-cotton, cotton-
jowar, cotton-pulses-jowar, intercropping with onion, groundnut
and blackgram.
Karnataka Monocropped cotton, cotton-wheat, intercropping with chilli,
groundnut, blackgram and greengram.
2. Jute
Growing Conditions Cropping System
Rainfed Conditions Jute – Lentil, Jute-blackgram-Wheat, Jute-Rice-Toria, inter crop
with green gram, vegetables etc.,
Irrigated Conditions Jute-Rice-Potato, Jute-Rice-Lentil/Pea, Jute-Rice-Wheat, Jute –
Rice-Mustard
3. Sugarcane
Cropping Systems
Sub tropical region Tropical region
Paddy- Autumn Sugarcane-ratoon-wheat Bajra-Sugarcane(pre-seasonal)-Ratoon- wheat
Greengram- Autumn Sugarcane-ratoon- Paddy-Sugarcane-Ratoon- Finger millet
wheat
Maize- Autumn Sugarcane-ratoon-wheat Paddy-Sugarcane-Ratoon- Wheat
Kharif Crops-Potato-Spring Sugarcane- Paddy-Sugarcane-Ratoon- gingelly
ratoon-Wheat
Kharif Crops-Mustard-Spring Sugarcane- Paddy-Sugarcane-Ratoon- urd.
ratoon-Wheat
Kharif Crops-Pea/Coriander-Spring Cotton-Sugarcane-Ratoon—wheat
Sugarcane-ratoon-Wheat
Kharif Crops-Wheat-late Planted Sugarcane-Ratoon-Kharif rice-Winter rice.
Sugarcane-ratoon-Wheat
16ANNEXURE-II
Quarterly Progress Report of FLDs on Cotton/Jute/Sugarcane.
Name of the State Reporting Period .
. Name of the Agency
Crop Types of Physical FLDs No. of Varieties Critical Financial ( Rs in lakh)
FLD District/ Farmers inputs
T A. Block provided Allocation Expenditure
village
T=Target, A= Achievement
Extension activities:
Crop Conditions
Quarterly Progress Report on HDPS trials on Cotton
Name of the State Reporting Period
Name of Name of Physical Target Achievement Financial
District Block / (ha) (Rs in Lakh)
Village Variety Spacing Area Allocation Expenditure
No of (Ha)
plants/ha
Name of the Agency
Extension activities:
Crop Conditions
17ANNEXURE-II (a)
Annual Progress Report of FLDs
Implementing Agency:
1. Introduction
2. Objectives
3. Technologies demonstrated:
4. Physical & Financial progress
a. Physical
State/District Villages Target (ha) Achievement (ha) Total
SC ST Women Others SC ST Women Others
Total
b. Financial ( Rs in Lakh)
State/District Villages Allocation Expenditure Total
SC ST Women Others SC ST Women Others
Total
5. Input distributed
Type of FLD Name of the input Quantity Rate Cost ( Rs.)
Total
6. Impact of FLD
State/District Cost of inputs Cost of cultivation Net profit Additional Benefit Cost
(Rs/ha) (Rs/ha) (Rs/ha) profit due to Ratio
FLD Farmer FLD Farmer FLD Farmer FLD ( Rs/ha)
Practice Practice Practice
Total
Average
7. Extension activities
State/District Extension programme
Scientist Farmers Field days Awareness News
visit meeting programme paper/Radio/Video
coverage
Total
6. Financial progress ( Rs. in Lakh)
Centres Unspent Balance Allocation Release Expenditure Balance
Total
7. Success Stories
8. Monitoring reports
9. UC ( Form GFR 19-A)
10. Audited UC
18ANNEXURE-III
Quarterly Progress Report of Insecticide Resistance
Management (IRM) under cotton
Name of IRM Centre Reporting Period . .
State
Components Physical Financial ( Rs in lakh) Remarks
Target Achievements Allocation Expenditure
Villages
No. of Farmers
Area (Ha)
Field Visits Organization
Farmers meeting
Organization
Field day Organization
Training Programme
Organization
Training Farmers No. of
leaflets/ pamphlets
distributed
Technology Chart
Manual / Popular articles
Pamphlets
Press Release
Radio talk / TV shows
Field Schools
SRF engaged
Field workers engaged
Crop Condition:-
Insect Pest situation
Yield expected (kg lint/ha)
Any specific information
19ANNEXURE-III(a)
Annual Progress Report of IRM under cotton
Implementing Agency
1. Introduction
2. Objectives
3. Zone wise IRM strategies disseminated
4 Spread of IRM Across India
State/District Villages Farmers Area in ha Manpower employed
Field workers RA/SRF
Total
5.Impact of IRM on yield and no of sprays
State/District Average no of insecticide sprays Yield (kg lint/ha)
IRM Total Non IRM Total IRM Non
Sucking Boll Sucking Boll IRM
pests worms pests worms
Total
Average
6.Impact of IRM on the Benefit Cost ratio
State/District Cost of spray Cost of cultivation Net profit Additional Benefit Cost
(Rs/ha) (Rs/ha) (Rs/ha) profit due to Ratio
IRM Non IRM Non IRM IRM Non IRM ( Rs/ha)
IRM IRM
Total
Average
7.Extension activities carried out in IRM villages
State/District Extension programme
Field visit Farmers Field days Training of scouts Farmers training
meeting
Total
8.Centre wise financial progress ( Rs, in Lakh)
State/District Unspent Allocation Release Expenditure Balance
Balance
Total
9. Success Stories
10. Monitoring reports
11. UC ( Form GFR 19-A)
12. Audited UC
20ANNEXURE-IV
Quarterly Progress Report of OPMAS under cotton
Name of OPMAS Centre Reporting Period
State
Components Physical Financial ( Rs in lakh) Remarks
Target Achievements Allocation Expenditure
No. of Villages
Area Coverage
No. of Farmers
Village group meeting
No. of Farmer attend
Farmers’ Training
No. of Farmer attend
Training
News paper coverage
Radio talks/Videos /
Photo
Project Officer
employed
Field Scout
Data Entry Operator
Crop Condition:
Insect Pest situation:
Yield expected (kg lint/ha):
Advisory to the farmers:
Any specific information:
21ANNEXURE-IV(a)
Annual Progress Report of OPMAS under cotton
Implementing Agency
1. Introduction
2. Objectives
3. Spread of OPMAS Across India
State/District Villages Farmers Area in ha Manpower employed
Field workers RA/SRF Data entry
operator
Total
4. Data observation, up loading & survey report
State/District Major pests observed Data fed in website Advisory issued
Sucking Boll worm Fixed field Random field
5. Impact of OPMAS on yield and no of sprays
Average no of Yield (kg lint/ha) Cost of Net profit
insecticide sprays cultivation (Rs/ha)
(Rs/ha)
State/District IPM Non IPM Non IPM Non IPM Non
IPM IPM IPM IPM
Total
Average
6. Extension activities
State/District Farmers Farmers Training of News paper/Radio/Video coverage
meeting training project staff
Total
7. Centre wise financial progress ( Rs, in Lakh)
Centres Unspent Balance Allocation Release Expenditure Balance
Total
8. Success Stories
9. Monitoring reports
10. UC ( Form GFR 19-A)
11. Audited UC
22ANNEXURE-V
Quarterly / Annual Progress Report of Jute Seed production programme
Name of the Agency Reporting Period .
.
Components Name of Year of Area under Location Quantity (Qtls) Remarks Financial ( Rs in
Jute Seed Variety Release Seed of Seed lakh)
Production Production Prodn. Allocation Expenditure
Plan (ha) Dist /
Target Achievement
(Quintal) Block /
village
Production of
Breeder Seed
Production of
Foundation
Seed
Production of
Certified
Seeds.
Seed Village/
Govt. Farm
(minimum 10
ha)
ANNEXURE-VI
Quarterly / Annual Progress Report of National / State Level Training Programme
Name of the Agency/Organization Reporting Period
Sr. Name of Physical Title of Venue No. of Financial (Rs. in Lakh)
No: Training the and Date Participants
Training of
Training
Target Achievement Allocation Expenditure
1. National
Level
2. State Level
Total---(cid:198)
List of lectures:
23ANNEXURE-VII
Quarterly/Annual Progress Report of Bio-agent lab / Tissue Culture lab
Implementing Agency Reporting Period
Components Physical Location of Progress so Type & Financial ( Rs in lakh)
Bio-agent Target Achievement Lab far quantity of Allocation Expenditure
lab . Dist/Block/ equipment Bio-agent
Village Purchased Produced
Total
Tissue Physical Location of Progress so No of Financial ( Rs in lakh)
Culture lab Lab far Seedlings
Dist/Block/ equipment produced
Village Purchased
Target Achievement Allocation Expenditure
Total
24Annexure-VIII
Components and Pattern of Assistance under NFSM- Commercial Crops
during 12th Plan Period
1. Cotton based cropping system
Sl. Component Unit cost (Rs.) Implementing agency
No
1 Insecticide Resistant Management Rs.4.5 lakh / dist + CICR, Nagpur
(IRM) Administrative cost
2 Online Pest Monitoring and Rs. 4.5 lakh / dist + NCIPM, New Delhi
Advisory Services (OPMAS) Administrative cost
3 Front Line Demonstration on Rs.7000/ha (Rs. 6000 for SDA/ ICAR/SAUs/
(a) Integrated Crop Management inputs & Rs. 1000 for KVK/NGOs /
Contingency) Cooperatives
(ICM) (0.4 ha size)
3 Front Line Demonstration on Desi Rs.8000/ha (Rs 7000 for ICAR/SAUs/ KVK/NGOs
(b) and ELS cotton (0.4 ha size) / ELS inputs & Rs. 1000 for /Cooperatives /State Dept
Contingency) of Agriculture
Cotton Seed Production.
3 Front Line Demonstration on Rs.7000/ha (Rs. 6000 for ICAR/SAUs/ KVK/NGOs
(c) Intercropping (0.4 ha size) inputs & Rs. 1000 for /Cooperatives /State Dept
Contingency) of Agriculture -
4 Trials on High Density Planting Rs.9000/ha (Rs. 8000 for ICAR/SAUs/ KVK/NGOs
System (0.4 ha size) inputs & Rs. 1000 for /Cooperatives /State Dept
Contingency) of Agriculture
5 Contingencies & Electronic Rs. 30.00 lakh DOCD, Mumbai
Print Media
2. Jute based cropping system
Sl. Component Unit cost Implementing agency
No
1 Seed production State Department, CRIJAF,
Production of Breeder Seed Rs 20000/qtl NSC, SFCI, SAU, ICAR,
Production of Foundation Seed Rs.12000/qtl KVKs and farmers group
Production of certified Seeds Rs.5000/qtl
2. Seed Village programme and Rs. 5500/- per qtl. of State Department of
Production of seed in government Certified Seed produced Agriculture, Universities,
farm KVKs, SSC, NSC, SFCI &
SSCA
3 FLDs on alternate Retting Rs. 20000/FLD (Rs. 18500 ICAR/SAUs/ KVK
technologies (0.25 ha ) for inputs & Rs. 1500 for
Contingency)
4 FLDs on Production technologies Rs.8000/ha (Rs. 7000 for ICAR/SAUs/ KVK/NGOs
/ Intercropping (0.4 ha each) inputs & Rs. 1000 for /Cooperatives /State Dept of
contingency) Agriculture
5 National level training Rs.80000/Training CRIJAF, NIRJAFT, SAU such
(25 Participants X 3 days) other organization.
State level training Rs. 40000/Training State Dept of Agriculture
(20 Officials X 2 days) SAU / KVK
6 Contingencies & Electronic Rs. 30.00 lakh DOJD, Kolkata
Print Media
25Annexure-I
3. Sugarcane based cropping system
Sl. No Component Unit cost (Rs.) Implementing agency
1 Demonstration on Rs.8000 per ha (Rs.7000 for ICAR/SAUs/ KVK/NGOs
intercropping and single inputs & Rs. 1000 for /Cooperatives /State Dept of
Contingency) Agriculture
bud chip technology with
Sugarcane. (0.4 ha each)
2 Assistance for Breeder Rs.40000 per ha SAUs/ ICAR and Sugarcane
Seed Production (Rs. 34000 for inputs & Rs. Research Institute
6000 for Contingency)
3 Production of tissue Rs. 3.5 per seedlings Sugarcane Institutions, Sugar
culture raised plantlets/ Factories, NGOs
seedlings
4 Strengthening / 50% of cost limited to Rs. 75 Sugar factories/ SAU’s/
establishment of bio agent lakhs per laboratory ICAR/ Sugarcane Research
Institute etc.
and tissue culture
laboratory
5 National Level Trainings Rs.50000 per training IISR, SBI, VSI, UPCSR, etc.
(25 Participants X 2 days)
State level training Rs.40000 per training State Government KVKs/
(20 Officials X 2 days) SAU NGO etc.
6 Contingencies & Rs. 30.00 lakh DOSD, Lucknow
Electronic Print
Media
#####################
26