DARE-ICAR
Global Reach
Department of Agricultural Research and Education
Indian Council of Agricultural Research
Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare
New DelhiDARE-ICAR
Global Reach
Department of Agricultural Research and Education
Indian Council of Agricultural Research
Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare
New DelhiPublished: June 2020
Citation:
Arunachalam A. and A.K. Misra (2020). DARE-ICAR Global Reach.
Indian Council of Agricultural Research, New Delhi. p. 30
Compilation and Editing
A. Arunachalam and A.K. Misra
Design
V.K. Bharti, Chief Production Officer, DKMA
All Rights Reserved
© 2020, Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR)
Published by International Relations, ICAR Hqrs, Krishi Bhawan, New Delhi and
Printed at M/s. Royal Offset Printers, A-89/1, Naraina Industrial Area, Phase-I, New Delhi-110028Department of Agricultural Research and Education (DARE) was
created in the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare, Govt.
of India in the year 1973 and was mandated under the assigned
business rules to address the international cooperation pertaining
to all aspects of agricultural research and education. DARE has
been implementing this largely through its premier autonomous
organization, the Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR).
ICAR is the apex research organization of the National Agricultural
Research and Education (NARES) system of the country with
a high standing amongst international agricultural research
organizations. Since its inception in 1929, the Council has been
spearheading agricultural research, education and frontline
extension activities for ensuring food and nutritional security,
climate resilience and enhanced farmers’ income in the country.
Indian agriculture represents a huge diversity of agro-climatic
conditions. The country has been classified into 128 agro-climatic
zones based on land use, soil type, irrigation, amount of rainfall
received etc. In order to address the problems and capitalize on
the prospects of each zone, ICAR conducts location and region-
specific research and technology generation. ICAR technologies
have significantly contributed to the country’s food basket in the
past leading to mitigation of deficiency and continue enabling food
self-sufficiency sustainably. In the context of emerging challenges,
the Council is committed to meeting the changing needs of all the
stakeholders including farmers, students, industry, entrepreneurs
and consumers at large. Many other countries have similar agro-
climatic diversity as we have in India. Therefore, we feel that
ICAR technologies can be shared to benefit other countries, as
well. Besides, training programs organized by the Council can be
customized for the needs of the farmers, students, scientists and
other stakeholders from other countries.
Learning however is a two-way process. The experience,
expertise and know-how available with other countries can be
taken advantage of through appropriate mechanism based on
mutual interest. Keeping this in view, DARE/ICAR has developed
partnerships with regional organizations, country-specific
ECAfERP
iiicollaborations, and research and capacity building programs with
Universities/Institutions of global repute. This document depicts
these efforts focusing on recent activities highlighting other
strengths in different areas pertaining to agriculture. I greatly
appreciate the efforts put in by my colleagues in the Council in
bringing out this document, which I am sure will go a long way in
promoting international cooperation.
Place: New Delhi (Trilochan Mohapatra)
Date: 15-04-2020 Secretary, DARE and Director General, ICARContents
Preface iii
Executive Summary vii
Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) 01
Mechanism for Facilitation 04
Global Partnerships for Agri-R&D 06
ICAR-CGIAR Collaboration 07
SAARC Agricultural Cooperation 10
India-ASEAN Collaboration 12
BIMSTEC Cooperation 13
G-20 Collaboration 14
BRICS Collaboration 16
Afghanistan Collaboration 17
Myanmar Collaboration 18
India-Africa Cooperation 20
Mekong-Ganga Cooperation 21
Nepal Cooperation 22
Sri Lanka Collaboration 22
Asia-Pacific Association of Agriculture Research Institutions 23
Network of Aquaculture Centres in Asia-Pacific 23
Centre for Agriculture and Bioscience International 24
World Vegetable Centre, Taiwan 25
Foreign-aided/Collaborative Research 26
Germplasm Exchange 27
HRD and Capacity Building 27
vExecutive Summary
The Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) has
international cooperation mechanisms under the provisions
of Government of India, facilitated by the Department of
Agricultural Research and Education (DARE) through MoUs/
Work Plans signed with various Countries/International
Organisations/ reputed Foreign Universities and Institutions.
So far, DARE/ICAR has entered into 61MoUs (Figure 1) with
different countries/organisations for furthering collaborative
research. Besides the above-mentioned modes which
entail bilateral cooperation, DARE-ICAR also participates
in multilateral cooperation under SAARC (South Asian
Association for Regional Cooperation, ASEAN (Association of
Southeast Asian Nations), BIMSTEC (Bay of Bengal Initiative
for Multi-Sectoral Technical and Economic Cooperation),
BRICS (Brazil, Russia, India, China, South Africa), etc.
Collaborative research is also carried out through
structured work plans (through additional 12 different
MoUs operational currently) between ICAR and the CGIAR
(Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research)
Centres housed in ICAR’s National Agricultural Science
viiCentre Complex in New Delhi. In addition, CABI (Centre for
Agriculture and Biosciences International), FAO (Food and
Agriculture Organization), AVRDC (World Vegetable Centre),
NACA (Network of Aquaculture Centres in Asia-Pacific),
APAARI (Asia-Pacific Association of Agriculture Research
Institutions), UN-CAPSA (Centre for Alleviation of Poverty
through Sustainable Agriculture), APCAEM (Asian and Pacific
Centre for Agricultural Engineering and Machinery) and ISTA
(International Seed Testing Association) are the other agencies
with whom ICAR has meaningful collaborations.
The MoUs and Work Plans generally
cover research in prioritized areas
of agriculture and allied sector to
address specific national problems,
study visits and training of scientists,
exchange of technical knowledge,
supply of germplasm and capacity
building. During the last five years,
over 1688 Scientists/science leaders
were deputed abroad under the
foreign collaborative programmes.
Figure 1. MoUs of ICAR/DARE across continents
One of the highlights of international
collaboration in the field of agriculture was the signing of MOUs
on 16th October 2016 during BRICS Summit hosted by India
in Goa for the establishment of BRICS-Agriculture Research
Platform with its coordination unit in India. This platform enables
information and knowledge sharing between the BRICS nations.
viiiTwo other landmark achievements beyond borders being our
strategic partnership in the establishment of Advanced Centre
for Agricultural Research and Education (ACARE) in Myanmar
and Afghan National Agricultural Science and Technology
University (ANASTU) in Kandahar, Afghanistan. India assisted
in the establishment of laboratories, and developed modules
for faculty development and course curricula for agricultural
sciences. These global footprints have proven India’s
strength in global working for human resource development
and institution building. Besides, the DARE/ICAR has also
aligned its programs for South-South Cooperation enabling
international cooperation through India-Africa Forum and also
ASEAN-India programs. In 2017, India hosted the ASEAN India
Agriculture Ministers’ Meeting in New Delhi where our Action
Plan (2017-20) was agreed upon and signed for cooperation.
In 2015, India hosted the India-Africa Forum Summit in New
Delhi where several strategic partnerships for agriculture
were established.
DARE/ICAR is an important and active partner in promoting
collaboration in agricultural research and education in the
SAARC region. For instance, the ICAR Institutes are involved
in training and capacity building in the region in specified
aspects of agriculture, dairy and fisheries. Besides, DARE/
ICAR enables research collaboration through the Institutional
mechanisms of BIMSTEC (Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi-
Sectoral Technical and Economic Cooperation) and G-20
nations through G-20 Meeting of Chief Agricultural Scientists
(MACS).
In addition, ICAR promotes and DARE facilitates the process of
research collaborations through foreign-aided R&D projects.
At present there are about 54 foreign-aided collaboration
projects. A half-yearly monitoring mechanism has been put in
place to review the progress of such projects.
With a view to piloting a few transformative global strategies in
India, ICAR had implemented the World Bank funded National
Agriculture Innovation Project (NAIP, 2004-13) that gave
useful results in term of modernizing our R&D infrastructure,
ixtechnology foresighting and enabling ecosystem for Agriculture Research
and Development in the country. In 2018, another landmark project “National
Higher Agricultural Education Project” has been implemented with the support
of World Bank to strengthen and promote quality higher agricultural education
in the country.
ICAR works closely with the Consultative Group on International Agricultural
Research (CGIAR), which is an international R&D network having 15 Research
Centres [Africa Rice Center (West Africa Rice Development Association,
WARDA), Bioversity International, Center for International Forestry Research
(CIFOR), International Center for Tropical Agriculture (CIAT), International
Center for Agricultural Research in the Dry Areas (ICARDA), International Crops
Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics (ICRISAT), International Food Policy
Research Institute (IFPRI), International Institute of Tropical Agriculture (IITA),
International Livestock Research Institute (ILRI), International Maize and Wheat
Improvement Center (CIMMYT), International Potato Center (CIP), International
Rice Research Institute (IRRI), International Water Management Institute
(IWMI), World Agroforestry Centre (formerly International Centre for Research
in Agroforestry, ICRAF), World Fish Center (earlier International Center for
Living Aquatic Resources Management, ICLARM)]. India is a donor member of
CGIAR System for decades and contributes substantially through CGIAR System
Council mechanisms. Out of these 15 Centres, International Crops Research
Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics (ICRISAT) has its headquarters at Hyderabad
xin the State of Telangana, India. The remaining CGIAR
research organizations have headquarters elsewhere, but
have a strong presence in India in the form of a country
or South Asia regional offices in India. Through mutual
agreements and work plans, ICAR participates in global
agricultural research that benefits Indian agriculture. The
broad areas of research collaboration with CGIAR system
involves: enhanced research cooperation in the areas of
priority, germplasm supply and technology development to
achieve targeted crop and animal productivity and quality
in India, focussed strategies for joint efforts to address
the issues like utilisation of rice fallows, rainfed/dryland
agriculture and water management.
In the arena of human resource development, ICAR is the nodal
agency for admission of foreign
students to Indian Institutions for
agricultural education. To this
effect, DARE/ICAR administers (i)
India-Africa fellowship, (ii) India-
Afghanistan fellowship, (iii) India-
Nepal fellowship, (iv) SAARC
PhD Scholarship in Agricultural
Biotechnology and (v) Netaji Subhas
Chandra Bose International
fellowship for doctoral research.
In addition to these, DARE/ICAR has entered into several
collaborations through country’s bilateral arrangements to
benefit from knowledge sharing and overall experience and
exposure to the latest development of technology from/for
various countries.
In short, the DARE-ICAR while involved in promoting
agricultural research, education and extension at national
level, it is also having its footprints beyond borders. Some of
the salient and prospective collaborations at international
level through bilateral/multilateral agreements and also
through MoUs/Work Plans have been summarized in this
document.
xixiixiiixivICAR |
Indian Council of Agricultural Research
The Indian National Agricultural Research
and Education Systems (NARES) is one
of the largest in the world with respect to
human resource, infrastructure, research,
education and extension network. The Indian
Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) is
the apex body of this National Agricultural
Research and Education System and was
established on 16 July 1929 as Imperial
Council of Agricultural Research, which was
renamed as Indian Council of Agricultural
Research in 1948. ICAR operates under
the guidance and governance of the
Department of Agricultural Research and
Education (DARE), Ministry of Agriculture
and Farmers Welfare, Government of India.
ICAR with its headquarters at New Delhi
coordinates, guides and manages research,
education and extension in agriculture and
allied sector. It has a vast network of 102
research institutes including 4 Deemed to
be Universities, 11 Agricultural Technology
Application Research Institutes (ATARIs)
and 70+ agricultural universities or
universities with agriculture faculty and 717
farm science centres popularly known as
Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVK) spread across
different agro-climatic zones of the country.
1Vision
Ensure food and income security for all, through technological
innovations and sustainable agricultural production.
Mission
Harness power of science and education with a human touch
for higher and sustainable agricultural production.
ICAR Today
1. Leads with distinction as one of the largest national
agricultural research systems
2. Custodian of a huge collection of germplasms of plants,
animals, fishes and microbes
3. Carries out basic and strategic research, and develops
technologies for sustainable production systems, assured
livelihood and income security
4. Provides science-based agro-technology advisory services
to a large farming community
5. Supports agricultural education in the country through
its deemed to be Universities and State Agricultural
Universities on the pattern of University Grants Commission
(UGC)
6. Provides evidence-based techno-economic
recommendations to the Government of India for policy
formulation for agricultural sector
7. Provides techno-economic and educational support
to developing countries for increasing south-south
cooperation
0502
RACI
2ICAR 2050: focus Areas of Research
1. Genetic potential improvement and value chains of agricultural commodities
2. Agricultural productivity, efficiency and profitability
3. Resilience to climate change, and abiotic and biotic stresses
4. Improve food, nutritional and health security
5. Risk management strategies in agriculture and allied sectors
6. Sustainability of natural resource base of agriculture
7. Valuation of ecosystem services
8. Agricultural markets, policies and institutions
9. Bio-security, especially emerging from cross-border vector-borne diseases
10. New educational and learning system and environments
3Mechanism for facilitation
International cooperation in DARE-ICAR has been operating
through the MoUs/Work Plans signed with various countries/
International Organizations/Foreign Universities and Institutes
with DARE as the nodal Department after due clearances from
other government of India ministries/departments (Ministry of
External Affairs, Ministry of Home Affairs, Ministry of Commerce
& Industry and Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate
Change depending on requirement). International cooperation of
this kind is generally of bilateral nature wherein the MoUs are
signed either between the Government of India (represented by
DARE) and the Government of another country (represented by
their department handling agriculture), or between the ICAR and
another foreign autonomous body/Institute/University. DARE-
ICAR also participates in the MoUs/Work Plans signed by the
Department of Agriculture Cooperation & Farmers Welfare and
Departments of Animal Husbandry Dairying and Fisheries, which
often play the nodal role.
Further, the Ministry of Science and Technology, Govt. of India
has several programmes of S&T cooperation with various
countries and international organizations in which DARE-ICAR
is the participating agency for agricultural research. At Inter-
Government level, Joint Commissions/Working Groups constituted
by the Ministry of External Affairs and the Ministry of Commerce
do have component of agricultural research in which DARE-ICAR
participates directly or through the Department of Agriculture
Cooperation & Farmers Welfare and the Departments of Animal
Husbandry Dairying and Fisheries.
DARE provides the governmental linkages for establishing
international cooperation in agricultural R&D and education upon
the technical recommendation from ICAR. Various international
scholarships and fellowships are channelized through DARE for
enabling foreign students to come and study in India and also for
enabling our scientists for study and capacity building programs
abroad.
4At ICAR level, in order to facilitate the International Cooperation and to bridge
the functionalities between DARE and ICAR, and eventually beyond Ministry
level, the International Relations (IR) Division has been established in ICAR
Headquarters in 2014 with the following mandate:
1. To reach beyond borders legitimately for Agri-R&D.
2. To do global technology foresighting and partnerships
3. To enable research proposals for foreign collaboration and funding.
4. To facilitate SMD/Institute interface with DARE as a single-window and vice
versa.
5. To enable official expert visitors from foreign countries to ICAR Institutes,
and from India to abroad
Guidelines for foreign Deputation and Global Partnership
DARE-ICAR guidelines for establishing foreign collaborations vide F.No. 290/
IR/Misc. Corr./2018 dt. 8th May, 2018 has been hosted in the DARE and ICAR
websites. The IR Division of the Council further also enables and handholds all its
Research Institutes and State/Central Agricultural Universities for establishing
global partnerships. Likewise, if any international or global organizations
and agencies are interested in collaboration in India for agricultural research
and education, the International Relations (IR) division of ICAR enables and
facilitates the same following the standard guidelines. Foreign students who
are interested in taking admission to Indian Agricultural Universities for degree
programs and foreign scientists for capacity building in India, the DARE-ICAR
helps them through Indian Missions abroad in identifying the appropriate
Universities, Institutes, etc.
In order to provide single window management system for quick processing
foreign deputation of scientist/officers, the International Relations (IR) Division
of ICAR in cooperation with International Cooperation (IC) Section of the
Department of Agricultural Research and Education (DARE) has put in place
a Foreign Visit Management System (https://fvms.icar.gov.in). During the last
three years (2017-19), a total of over 688 Scientists/science leaders were
deputed abroad under various MoUs and agreements with foreign agencies/
countries.
5Global Partnerships for
Agri-R&D
6ICAR-CGIAR Research Collaboration
Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research
(CGIAR), a global partnership that unites international
organizations working on food and agriculture, is having close
collaboration with Department of Agricultural Research &
Education (DARE) and Indian Council of Agricultural Research
(ICAR). It works through its 15 Research Centres. Out of
these 15 Centres, International Crops Research Institute
for the Semi-Arid Tropics (ICRISAT) has its headquarter at
Hyderabad in the State of Telangana, India. The remaining
CGIAR research organizations have headquarters elsewhere,
but 10 of them have their regional/country offices located in
India. Secretary, DARE and Director General, ICAR is the Ex-
Officio Vice-Chair of the Governing Board of ICRISAT and is
currently also a member in the Board of Trustees of Bioversity
International, ICARDA and IRRI.
India is a donor member of CGIAR System from decades
and contributes substantially through Window-I and Window
III of the CGIAR System. Presently, India is one of the voting
members in the CGIAR System Council representing the
South Asia Constituency of the Council along with other two
alternate representatives from South Asia namely Bangladesh
and Sri Lanka. Secretary DARE & Director General, ICAR is
the official member in the CGIAR System Council from India.
DARE/ICAR works closely with 12 of the CG Centres through
agreements/work plans with the approval of Government
of India. This first agreements were signed with CIMMYT
and IRRI in the year 1974 (Table 1). The broad areas of
research collaboration with CGIAR system involves:
enhanced cooperation in the areas of priority besides genetic
improvement, germplasm supply, technology development to
achieve targeted crop and animal productivity and quality in
India, focused strategies for joint efforts to address the issues
like utilization of rice fallows, agroforestry and watershed
development, rainfed/dry land agriculture and water
management, and fish breeding protocols.
7Table 1: Status of MoA /MoU and Work plan with CG Centres
S.No. Name of CG Centre Agreement Active Work
Date Plan Period
1. International Maize and Wheat Improvement 15.03.1974 2018-2022
Centre (CIMMYT), Mexico
2. International Rice Research Institute (IRRI), 15.03.1974 2017-2022
Philippines
3. International Potato Centre (CIP), Peru 17.11.1975 2018-2022
4. International Research Centre for Semi-Arid 15.07.1976 2019-2023
Tropics (ICRISAT), India
5. World Agro-Forestry Centre (ICRAF), Kenya 31.10.1985 2016-2020
6. International Centre for Agricultural Research 15.12.1986 2017-2022
in the Dry Areas (ICARDA), Beirut (Lebanon)
7. International Food Policy Research Institute 01.08.1988 2020-2025
(IFPRI), USA
8. World Fish Centre (WFC), Penang, Malaysia 15.07.1996 2019-2024
9. Biodiversity International (BI), Rome, Italy 19.07.1996 2017-2021
10. International Water Management Institute 25.11.1996 2018-2022
(IWMI), Sri Lanka
11. International Centre for Tropical Agriculture 17.06.1998 2017-2020
(CIAT), Columbia
12. International Livestock Research Institute 07.06.2004 2019-2022
(ILRI), Kenya
8This collaboration has paid rich dividends in the past. For instance, improved
lines of wheat from CIMMYT and of rice from IRRI, which were rigorously
evaluated by the Indian scientists at various locations in the country to identify
best lines and develop crop management practices suitable to local conditions,
contributed to India’s Green Revolution. During 2019-20, the progress included
release/identification of 35 varieties by ICAR developed through CGIAR
partnership. Further, the partnership involved 153 KVKs apart from several
ICAR Institutes, benefitting over 3 lakh farmers. One of the major highlights
was capacity building; the CGIAR Centres facilitated foreign deputation training
of 74 ICAR scientists (60 short-term and 14 long-term) in different domains for
enhanced skill.
There is a well-structured mechanism to review the progress. Progress
presentations are made by the CGIAR centre representatives located at New
Delhi once annually every year under the Chairmanship of Secretary, DARE and
DG, ICAR in presence of all partners/collaborators from ICAR. The succeeding
year work-plans are also discussed and finalized. This is the most productive and
visible partnership with global centres of excellence in the field of agriculture
that has been immensely beneficial to the country.
9SAARC Agricultural Collaboration
India has a strong presence in SAARC (South Asian
Association for Regional Cooperation). India contributed to the
establishment of SAARC-Agriculture Centre (SAC) located in
Dhaka. Since its inception, DARE/ICAR is a permanent member
of the Governing body of the SAC. In 2016, the then Hon’ble
Minister of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare, Government
of India Shri Radha Mohan Singh participated in the SAARC
Agriculture Ministers’ Meeting held at Dhaka, where India re-
affirmed its position for cooperation in agriculture.
One of the major roles of India/ICAR has been capacity building
of professionals from the SAARC Member States. A number of
SAARC sponsored training programmes have been conducted
successfully for promoting agricultural research cooperation
through ICAR Institutes in the areas of aquaculture, saline soil
reclamation, fish processing quality, climate smart agriculture
technology, agroforestry, herd health management of dairy
buffalo, advances in animal reproductive biotechnology, soil
health, and field epidemiology in veterinary science. Over 100
agricultural professionals and scientists from different SAARC
member countries have benefitted from these programmes.
Some of the Indian Scientists are working as subject matter
Hon’ble Agriculture Minister of India in SAARC Agriculture Ministers
Meeting in Dhaka
10specialists in R&D and management of SAARC Agricultural Centre. In our efforts
to promote cooperation in agricultural education, a SAARC PhD scholarship in
Agricultural Biotechnology has been instituted by the SAC during 2018-19, and
one student from Nepal has been admitted for the PhD program in ICAR-Indian
Agricultural Research Institute, New Delhi. This year, the SAC has approved two
more SAARC PhD Scholarship, one in Animal Science and the other in Fisheries
that will be hosted by ICAR-Indian Veterinary Research Institute (Izatnagar) and
ICAR-Central Institute for Fisheries Education (Mumbai), respectively.
Another milestone in this cooperation is the `Seeds without Borders’ initiative, a
multiparty agreement between Cambodia, India, Bangladesh, Nepal, Myanmar,
Sri Lanka, Thailand, Laos and Vietnam. This agreement has been expanded
to include Bhutan last year and now covers five of the eight SAARC member
nations. In India, this initiative is facilitated by ICAR and in the SAARC region, it
is by ICRISAT and IRRI. In recognition to the significant contributions of India for
agricultural growth and development in the SAARC region, ICAR was conferred
a Certificate of Appreciation that was handed over in person by the Director
of SAARC Agriculture Centre to the Director General of the Indian Council of
Agricultural Research on 20th August, 2018 in New Delhi. Gracing the SAARC
Charter Day on the 8th December, 2019 in Dhaka, the Director General, ICAR
gave a Keynote Address on `Agricultural Research for food and nutritional
security in South Asia, where he elaborated on the regional challenges, India’s
experiences and success stories and opportunities for enhanced collaboration
and cooperation among the SAARC member states.
SAARC Certificate of Appreciation to ICAR Secretary, DARE in SAARC Charter day
11India-ASEAN Collaboration
India-ASEAN countries have 25 years of international cooperation.
The Govt. of India has entrusted the working relationships on
agriculture and forestry sector to the Department of Agricultural
Research and Education (DARE). In agriculture and agroforestry
sectors, we are cooperating with ASEAN by way of agreed projects
such as Exchange of Farmers, ASEAN-India Fellowships for
Higher Agricultural Education in India and ASEAN, Exchange
of Agriculture Scientists, Empowerment of Women through
Cooperatives, Training Course on Organic Certification for Fruits
and Vegetables etc. These were further strengthened at the 4th
ASEAN-India Ministerial Meeting on Agriculture held in January
2018 at New Delhi, with the endorsement of the Medium-Term
Plan of Action for ASEAN-India Cooperation in Agriculture and
Forestry for 2016–2020. In the S&T field, we have projects such
as ASEAN-India S&T Digital Library, ASEAN-India Virtual Institute
for Intellectual Property, ASEAN-India Collaborative R&D Project
on Mariculture, Bio-mining and Bioremediation Technologies etc.
DARE has consistently facilitated the working relations between
India and ASEAN countries by enabling their visits, expert meetings
and through regular participation in the Working Group and the
Ministerial meetings. The 5th ASEAN-India Ministerial Meeting
on Agriculture and Forestry that was held at Brunei Darussalam
during 15-18 October, 2019 was attended by Hon’ble Minister of
State, Shri Kailash Choudhary. The approved India-ASEAN Plan of
Action 2016-2020 is currently under implementation and several
training programmes have been specially designed to benefit the
ASEAN Member States.
Shri Kailash Choudhary, Minister of State for Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare, Govt. of India in
the ASEAN-India Ministerial Meeting in Brunei DarussalamShri Parshottam Rupala, Minister of State for Agriculture and
Farmers’ Welfare, Govt. of India in the BIMSTEC Agriculture Ministers
Meeting in Myanmar
BIMSTEC Cooperation
Agriculture is one of the fourteen areas of The Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi-
Sectoral Technical and Economic Cooperation (BIMSTEC) Cooperation since
2007. The sector is led by Myanmar. The sector deepens its cooperation among
the Member States through BIMSTEC Experts Group Meeting on Agricultural
Cooperation (EGMAC) and conduct of other businesses related to this sector.
So far, six EGMAC, two Workshops on Good Agricultural Practices (GAP Phase
I & II), and a Workshop on improving Agricultural Trade and Investment have
been held. The Fourth BIMSTEC Meeting and the Expert Group on Agricultural
Cooperation was held in Kathmandu, Nepal from 6-7 April, 2015, where India
floated the cconcept notes on “South-South East Asian Diagnosis Network
for Ensuring Bio-security and Bio-safety” covering the area of crop/animal/
fisheries, and “Human Resources Development in Agriculture”
India hosted the International Seminar on Climate Smart Farming Systems for BIMSTEC CountriesThe First BIMSTEC Ministerial Meeting on Agriculture (1st BAMM) was held at
Nay Pyi Taw, Myanmar on the 12th July 2019 on the invitation of the Government
of the Republic of the Union of Myanmar, where India delivered its Statement
under the theme “Way Forward on BIMSTEC Agricultural Cooperation”. It was
agreed that the meeting be convened once in two years. Meanwhile, DARE/ICAR
has been participating in several of the workshops and secretarial meetings
to deliver on the objectives of BIMSTEC Cooperation in Agriculture. Hon’ble
Minister of State for Agriculture and Farmers’ Welfare Shri Parshottam Rupala ji
participated in the first BIMSTEC Ministers Meeting on Agriculture in Myanmar
on 12th June 2019 where it was agreed to hold an International Seminar on
Climate Smart Farming Systems for the benefit of the BIMSTEC countries. ICAR
organized the Seminar in New Delhi during 11-13 December, 2019 where 13
delegates from the BIMSTEC nations participated. During the program, India
shared its experiences through specially designed lectures and field visits.
G-20 Collaboration
The Group of Twenty (also known as G20) is an international forum
of the Governments and central bank governors from 20 major
economies. Five years ago, the G-20 platform realized the need for
bringing the Chief Agricultural Scientists governing national level
organizations in the G-20 nations to discuss and develop a road
map for science-led development processes. Its fifth meeting i.e. 5th
MACS held on 30-31 May, 2016 at Xi’an, China was attended by Dr.
A.K. Singh, DDG (Agricultural Extension), ICAR. India also agreed
to participate in the working group on Agriculture Technology
Sharing (ATS) formed during the G20 Meeting of Agricultural Chief
Scientists- 2016 (MACS-2016). In 2019, Dr. T. Mohapatra, Secretary,
DARE & Director General, ICAR participated in the G-20 MACS
event in Japan during 25-26 April, organized by the Agriculture,
Forestry and Fisheries Research Council Secretariat, Ministry of
Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries of Japan. India’s successful
demonstration of climate smart villages was presented, which
attracted the attention of the member countries. Field visits
provided opportunities to the member countries to learn ways and
strategies for rapid regeneration of agriculture in tsunami affected
areas in Japan. DARE/ICAR contributed to the technical aspects of
joint statements as adopted by the G-20 nations.
14Secretary, DARE & DG, ICAR Dr. T. Mohapatra in the G-20 MACS in Tokyo, Japan in 2019
Recently, in the 9th Meeting of G20 Agricultural Chief Scientists (MACS-G20)
that was held at Al Khobar, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia during 17-19 February,
2020, Dr SK Ambast, from ICAR-National Institute of Biotic Stress Management,
Raipur participated and suggested the need of regional cooperation among G20
nations in monitoring and forecasting transboundary insects/ pests movement
using spatial techniques and information technology, which was later adopted
in final draft communique of MACS.
Dr. S.K. Ambast, Jt. Director & Dean, ICAR-NIBSM, Raipur in G-20 MACS in Saudi Arabia in 2020
15BRICS (Brazil-Russia-India-China-South Africa)
Collaboration
India is an active partner in the BRICS. While we have done several programmes
for the BRICS, the expert consultation on climate smart agriculture organized
during 2012, was a great success, where the idea was conceived for establishing a
BRICS Agriculture Centre. In 2013, South Africa organized a Seminar on Climate
Smart Agriculture where a 4-member delegation led by Dr. A. Arunachalam
from ICAR participated and shared the Indian experiences. In 2015, the expert
committee of BRICS agreed on establishing a virtual Agricultural Research
Platform (ARP), with its secretariat in New Delhi managed by DARE. Eventually,
the MoU for Establishment of BRICS-ARP was signed on 16th of October,
2016. The ex-post-facto cabinet approval was given by Govt. of India on the 2nd
August, 2017. The BRICS-ARP is envisaged to be the natural global platform
for science-led agriculture-based sustainable development for addressing the
issues of world hunger, under- nutrition, poverty and inequality, particularly
between farmers’ and non-farmers’ income, and enhancing agricultural trade,
bio-security and climate resilient agriculture promote sustainable agricultural
development and poverty alleviation through strategic cooperation in agriculture
to provide food security in the BRICS member countries. Furthering our
relationships, India has been consistent in participating in the Senior Officers
meeting and in the Agricultural Ministers Meeting of BRICS countries hosted by
China during 2017 and by Brazil in 2019 strengthening our cooperation.
India hosted the Expert Consultation for BRICS Secretary (Agriculture), Govt. of India in the BRICS
Agriculture Research Platform in 2016 Agriculture Ministers’ Meeting in China
16Graduation Ceremony of ANASTU students at IARI
Afghanistan Collaboration
ICAR is playing an important role in developing trained human
resource for agricultural research in Afghanistan through partnership
in establishing the Afghan National Agricultural Sciences and
Technology University (ANASTU) in Kandahar with the support of
the Ministry of External Affairs (MEA), Government of India through
a bilateral cooperation programme. To this effect, a MoU was
signed between ICAR and ANASTU on April 21, 2016. Through this
cooperation, students of Afghanistan have had opportunity to study
MoU signed for establishing ANASTUin the premier Indian Agricultural Research Institute (IARI), New
Delhi. Under the Indian-Afghanistan Fellowship program, a total of
64 students have availed and benefitted from agricultural education
during 2017-19. IARI supported the establishment of laboratories in
ANASTU and developed course curricula for Masters’ degree program
in Agriculture. ICAR also designed capacity-building programs for the
faculty of ANASTU exposing them to advances in agricultural science
and technologies to help mentor the students thereof. So far, 3 batches
of students have undergone their studies in India. IARI did organize
Graduation Ceremonies for the successful students and issued Grade
Cards enabling them to secure degree conferment from ANASTU.
Myanmar Collaboration
A team led by Prof. M.S. Swaminathan
visited Myanmar during July 23-27,
2011 to explore Indian cooperation in
agriculture. Eventually, a MoU was
signed between the Government of
India and Myanmar on May 28, 2012
for setting-up of ACARE (Advanced Centre for Agricultural Research
and Education). DARE/ICAR was entrusted to establish the Centre. After
several rounds of discussion and detailed deliberations, an agreement
was signed between MEA & DARE/ICAR on September 21, 2015. ICAR
played a mentoring role in developing the centre, course curricula and
also did a 21 days training programme for 15 faculty members of Yezin
Agricultural University (YAU), Myanmar during May 31-June 20, 2016 in
three different areas: Advances in molecular breeding of crop plants,
post-harvest management and value addition of agri-produce, and
Agriculture knowledge management through innovative communication
interventions have been organized.
The postgraduate courses of YAU were revised as required and the
courses with revised course curriculum are being offered from the
academic session 2017-18 onwards. A revised Post Graduate Handbook
of YAU has also been printed and was released by the Minister of
Education, GOUM on the 2nd April, 2018 in the presence of the Ambassador
of India to Myanmar. Three new postgraduate programmes (M.Sc. &
18President of India dedicating ACARE to the People of Myanmar
Ph.D.) (Agricultural extension Education; Molecular Biology & Biotechnology;
and Food Engineering & Technology) have been started from the academic
session 2017-18. A dozen of the courses are being delivered by the IARI
faculty from India since then as per the agreement. Also, requisite laboratory
consumables (chemicals, glassware, plasticware, etc.) have been procured
and supplied to enable hands-on laboratory practical work. Five copies each of
relevant ICAR publications have also been given to the YAU for their archive. So
far, four students from Myanmar joined M.Sc. programme during the academic
session 2017-18 and two students joined during the academic session 2018-19
in various disciplines at IARI
under ACARE programme.
Further, four villages within
a radius of 30 kms of ACARE
have been adopted under
Participatory Knowledge
Management programme
for demonstration of suitable
production techniques. In
2018, the ACARE has been
dedicated by the Hon’ble
President of India to the
people of Myanmar. A Trainee Batch of ACARE Faculty in IARI, New Delhi
19India-Africa Cooperation
In the recent years, the South-South Cooperation
(SSC) has emerged as a parallel mechanism to
support the global quest for improved quality of life
across the world. Over the last decade, sustained
economic growth in emerging economies has fueled
a shift in the global center of gravity from the North to the South. The
South began looking beyond the North-South Cooperation (NSC)
and Triangular Development Cooperation (TDC) - which was enabled
by the Official Development Assistance (ODA) for development
cooperation. This led to new development cooperation architecture
with a considerable flow of resources within the Southern countries.
India-UN Development Partnership Fund, a dedicated facility within
the United Nations Fund for South-South Cooperation established
in 2017, has drawn the focus following the announcement by
Prime Minister Narendra Modi with the launch of a US$50 Million
Commonwealth window. The Fund’s new Commonwealth window
aims to catalyze the achievement of the Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs) in developing countries of the Commonwealth. The
countries supported by this fund are located in various parts of the
world and include some of the most vulnerable Member States of
the Commonwealth. This got impetus through the first and the third
India-Africa Forum Summit (IAFS) held in the year 2008 and 2015,
China hosted the Global Group of Ministers meeting for South-South Cooperation
in 2018
20respectively in New Delhi. The Second India-Africa Forum Summit was held in
the year 2011 at Addis Ababa, Ethiopia. Under the IAFS, special Agricultural
scholarships are offered to African Students for duration of two years and
three years to pursue Masters and Ph.D programmes in Agriculture and allied
subjects, respectively. Candidate admitted under the programme is provided
monthly fellowship, the air ticket and visa through the Indian Mission in the
respective African Country. All foreign students are provided accommodation
in the host-university campus. A total of 281 students have so far benefitted
through this program since 2010. Presently, 63 students from the African Union
are pursuing their studies in 17 different agricultural universities of India.
Mekong-Ganga Cooperation
Mekong Ganga Cooperation (MGC) is an initiative by
six countries – India, Cambodia, Lao PDR, Myanmar,
Thailand and Vietnam for cooperation in tourism, culture,
education, transport and communication. It was launched
in the year 2000 in Vientiane, Lao PDR. Both Ganga and
Mekong are civilization rivers, so the MCG initiative was
to foster close contacts among people inhabiting these
two major river basins. The grouping was also indicative
of cultural and commercial linkages between India and
Mekong Countries. The suggestion to set up this grouping
was made by the then Thai Foreign Minister to EAM
during his visit to India in July 2000. The then Minister of
External Affairs, Government of India Shri Jaswant Singh
welcomed the idea and suggested the names of the two
rivers to be the title of the Cooperation initiative. A project
on ‘Identification and conservation of rice germplasm for
nutritional and quality traits and enhancing profitability of
rice production through mechanization and downstream
processing’ is now accepted by India, Vietnam and Lao
PDR, and is under consideration.
21Nepal Cooperation
India-Nepal cooperation is historic and has been
growing strong day-by-day, which is evident by the
Work Plan for 2014-20 under Joint Agricultural Working
Group that includes: Study visits/Trainings, Opening of
National Agricultural Universities, Academic courses,
Collaborative research; operation, maintenance and
certification of sophisticated equipment, natural
resource management, agri-business and capacity
building through fellowships under Nepal-Aid Fund
Scheme. Under this scheme, scholarships are being
offered for Nepalese candidates for duration of four
years to pursue B.Sc (Agriculture) and for duration
of two years to pursue M.Sc (Agriculture) in Indian
Universities and Institutions. So far, five in 2015-16
and ten in 2016-17 students completed their graduate/
post-graduate courses from India. Ten students during
2017-18 and eight students during 2018-19 from
Nepal have been admitted in M.Sc courses in Indian
agricultural Universities. Furthering cooperation
with Nepal, India has proposed to provide technical
assistance in establishing a Deemed University for
Agricultural Education on the patterns of the Indian
Agricultural Research Institute, which is under active
consideration by the Ministry of External Affairs, Govt.
of India.
Sri Lanka Collaboration
ICAR signed an MoU with Sri Lanka Council of
Agricultural research and Policy in the Year 1998 and
a work plan during 2017-2019 which is being extended
for 2020. This bilateral cooperation enabled exchange
visits in different areas, consultation from India, short-
term training of Sri Lankan scientists in India, long-
term training (M.Sc. and Ph.D.) in India, exchange
of germplasm and technologies, and collaborative
22research projects. Over 25 students have so far taken benefit through these
programmes including one PhD student being hosted by ICAR-IARI, New Delhi.
Further, one of the CGIAR Centres, the IWMI (International Water Management
Institute) having its headquarter in Sri Lanka facilitates several agricultural
programmes on water-specific issues in the South-Asia region including India.
Asia-Pacific Association of
Agriculture Research Institutions
(APAARI), Thailand
ICAR is a member of the Asia-Pacific Association
of Agriculture Research Institutions (APAARI) since
1990 and has been contributing annually. The mission
of APAARI is to promote, coordinate and strengthen
agriculture and agri-food research and innovation
systems through partnerships and collaboration,
capacity development and advocacy for sustainable
development in Asia and the pacific. This network
is strengthened whereby several ICAR Institutes are
brought in to organize workshops and seminars.
India is represented by DARE/ICAR in the Executive
Council of APAARI. India holds the Vice-chair in the
Executive Council of APAARI, since 2018. Every year,
at least 5-10 ICAR scientists are hosted by APAARI for
thematic trainings and consultative workshops.
Network of Aquaculture Centres in
Asia-Pacific (NACA), Thailand
Since 1992, DARE is the founder and donor member
of the Network of Aquaculture Centres in Asia-
Pacific (NACA), which is a consortium of 18 member
countries of the Asia and Pacific region. It contributes
annually and an action plan between ICAR and NACA
is developed and reviewed every year. The ICAR-CIFA,
23ICAR-NBFGR, Lucknow hosted the NACA Discussions in 2019
Bhubaneswar is one of the Regional Lead Centres of NACA. India has been one
of the largest beneficiaries in terms of training of its personnel, strengthening
of existing infrastructure, capacity building, skill upgradation, and technology
transfer etc. Six scientists of ICAR-CIFA deputed to various international
meeting/workshops. This is one platform where ICAR has been able to project its
achievements and capabilities as a leader in the region. ICAR Representative is
a prominent member in the Steering Committee of NACA that sets the research
priorities. The ICAR-NACA Regional Expert Consultation meet on “Genetically
Responsible Aquaculture: Sustainability of genetically fit bloodstock and seed of
certified origin in Asia aquaculture” was conducted at ICAR-NBFGR, Lucknow
during 26-27 February, 2019.
Centre for Agriculture and Bioscience International
(CABI), United Kingdom
DARE signed an MoA with CABI on the 22nd September, 2017 with the objective of
collaboration and partnership in (a) Information management, (b) Smallholder
farmer support, pest management & SPS, (c) Farmer and Extension service
capacity building, (d) Tech transfer from India to other countries, (e) Research
and capacity building on microbial resources in agriculture and other plant
health science and (f) Continued collaboration with 2-way exchange of
biocontrol agents. A work plan has also been signed in 2018 to implement a
strategic research program on microbial taxonomy, diagnostics, biocontrol and
24quarantine protocols. Two of the ICAR Bureaus namely ICAR-NBAIM (Mau) and
ICAR-NBAIR (Bengaluru) are actively involved in these programs.
World Vegetable Centre (AVRDC), Taiwan
ICAR has been working with AVRDC through projects for over a decade.
However, it was only in 2019, the collaborative efforts have been institutionalized
through a MoU. The work plan is now being prepared covering different
aspects of vegetable research including application of molecular technologies
for plant breeding in vegetable crops. It is envisaged that this collaboration
will accelerate India’s strength in vegetable cultivation by enhancement
of productivity. Immediately after the MoU, the AVRDC shared its two top-
performing dual purpose (fresh market and processing) tomato breeding lines
with the ICAR. Earlier collaborations with AVRDC gave us leads in development
of high-yielding and disease resistant vegetable
crops in India. For instance, the `Arka Rakshak’,
multiple-resistant tomato variety with high
yielding potential (90-100 t/ha) was developed
by crossing one of ICAR’s advanced breeding
lines with an advanced breeding line sourced
from the World Vegetable Center. This variety
has transformed India’s tomato scenario due to
greater popularity amongst farmers.
ICAR-WorldVeg MoU inked on 30-10-2019
25foreign-Aided/Collaborative Research
ICAR has 54 international collaborative research projects with different
countries. Twenty-five projects are in animal science and fisheries sector,22
projects are in crop husbandry including field crops and horticultural crops
and10 projects are in the natural resource management sector. Some of
the major funding agencies include FAO, CSIRO (Australia), BBRC (UK),
UNDP, USIEF, INRA, JIRCAS, USAID, CABI, AVRDC, DIFD and BMGF (USA).
A few projects are funded by foreign universities viz., University of Newcastle
(Australia), University of Western Sydney (Australia), University of Queensland
(Australia), Griffith University (Australia), University of Edinburg, University of
Nebraska (USA), Pennsylvania State University (USA), University of Nottingham,
Norwegian University of Life Sciences, etc. Recently, the Council has got the
support of three projects that are supported by Indo-Swiss and/or Indo-UK
Funding Mechanisms. During 2019-20, ICAR has signed a MoU with Heinrich
Heine University, Germany to undertake joint research for introducing genome
edited traits for bacterial blight resistance into the Indian rice varieties.
One of the landmark projects is on next-generation breeding, genotyping
and digitization approaches for improving the genetic gain in Indian staple
crops supported by the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, USA that is being
implemented by the ICAR Institutes with CGIAR collaboration. The collaborations
in frontline research in a