Base Paper on Organic Farming
Organic farming aims for human welfare without harming the environment and follows the
principles of health, ecology, fairness and care for all including soil. The modern concept of
organic farming combines the tradition, innovation and science. Although, history states that
the movement for organic way of life recognized in 1905, it could gain ground after realizing
the ill effects of modern agriculture in the late 1990’s. In 1905, the British botanist Sir Albert
Howard, often referred to as the father of modern organic agriculture, documented
traditional Indian farming practices, and came to regard them as superior to conventional
agriculture science. During 1940, In Japan, Masanobu Fukuoka, a microbiologist working in
soil science and plant pathology, quit job as a research scientist, returned to his family's farm,
and devoted the next 30 years to develop a radical no-till organic method for growing grain,
now known as “Fukuoka farming”. Many other practices such as Rishi krishi, Natueco farming,
homa farming, panchagavya krishi and bio dynamic farming are associated with organic
agriculture. The reports indicates organic farming can minimize energy consumption by 30.7
% per unit of land by eliminating the energy required to manufacture synthetic fertilizers and
pesticides and by using internal farm inputs, thus reducing fuel used for transportation. India
can emerge as global leader due to the presence of large number of organic producers (almost
7 lakh producers) and they needs to be supported with technical knowledge and inputs
besides marketing infrastructure. The research results available for little over a decade
confirms the yield advantage in many crops such as basmati rice, maize, cotton, chickpea,
soybean, groundnut etc. However, the major impediment for growth of organic farming in
India is yield reduction in the initial years due to swift switch over from inorganic to organic,
wide gap between availability of organic source of nutrients and requirement and lack of pest
and disease management options. Most of the organic growers have expressed that lack of
support price for organically grown crops and marketing infrastructure as the major
constraint in promotion of organic agriculture. Although, much progress on research in
organic farming has been done, the new emerging areas of human health benefits,
understanding the economics with environmental markets, climate friendly farms and carbon
farming with organic farming system models needs to be addressed in future. The certification
systems of grower group, participatory guarantee system, know your farm and know your
food should be promoted in large scale.
Status of Organic Farming
Demand for organic products, especially in developed countries, has been increasing.
Globally, organic agriculture is practiced in 162 countries and 37 m ha of land are managed
organically by 1.8 million farm households. The global sale of organic food and drink reached
62.9 billion US dollors in 2011. The regions with the largest areas of organically managed
agricultural land are Oceania (12.1 million hectares of 33 percent of the global organic
farmland), Europe (10.6 million hectares or 29 percent of the global organic farmland) and
Latin America (6.8 million hectares or 23 percent). On a global level, the organic agricultural
land area increased by three percent compared with 2010. The countries with the most
organic agricultural land are Australia (12 million hectares), Argentina (3.8 million hectares)
and the United States (1.9 million hectares).
In Asia, land under organic management reached 3.6 million hectares for 2009 up from just
under 3.4 million hectares reported for 2008 and under 2.9 million hectares for 2007. Theexpansion of over 0.2 million hectares, a growth rate of close to 6 per cent comes on top of a
17 per cent growth from 2007 to 2008. It maintains an upward trend albeit a slower pace of
conversion. The main contributor of the expansion of cultivated acreage is India. With the
increasing awareness about the safety and quality of foods, long term sustainability of the
system and accumulating evidences of being equally productive, the organic farming has
emerged as an alternative system of farming which not only addresses the quality and
sustainability concerns, but also ensures a profitable livelihood option. Cultivated area under
certified organic farming has grown almost 17 fold in last one decade (42,000 ha in 2003-04
to 7.23 lakh ha in 2013-14). The state wise area under organic farming during 2013-14 is given
in Table 1.
Table 1 State wise Farm area (excluding Forest Area) under Organic Certification during
2013-14
S.No. State Name Organic Area (in Ha)
1 Andaman & Nicobar Islands 321.28
2 Andhra Pradesh 12325.03
3 Arunachal Pradesh 71.49
4 Assam 2828.26
5 Bihar 180.60
6 Chhattisgarh 4113.25
7 Delhi 0.83
8 Goa 12853.94
9 Gujarat 46863.89
10 Haryana 3835.78
11 Himachal Pradesh 4686.05
12 Jammu & Kashmir 10035.38
13 Jharkhand 762.30
14 Karnataka 30716.21
15 Kerala 15020.23
16 Lakshadweep 895.91
17 Madhya Pradesh 232887.36
18 Maharashtra 85536.66
19 Manipur 0
20 Meghalaya 373.13
21 Mizoram 0
22 Nagaland 5168.16
23 Odisha 49813.51
24 Pondicherry 2.84
25 Punjab 1534.39
26 Rajasthan 66020.35
27 Sikkim 60843.5128 Tamil Nadu 3640.07
29 Tripura 203.56
30 Uttar Pradesh 44670.10
31 Uttaranchal 24739.46
32 West Bengal 2095.51
Total 723039.00
Source: APEDA (2013-14)
The Government of India has implemented the National Programme for Organic Production
(NPOP) in the year 2001. The national programme involves the accreditation programme for
certification agencies, norms for organic production, promotion of organic farming etc. States
like; Uttaranchal, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Gujarat, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu,
Kerala, Nagaland, Mizoram, Sikkim have been promoting organic farming.
Organic produces are increasingly preferred by developed countries and major urban centres
in India. Huge demand for Indian organic products especially tea, coffee, cotton etc. exists in
the international market. A special class of consumers is also emerging in the domestic market
who requires quality food. The global trade during 2013-14 was USD 60 billion (Rs. 3,60,000
crores) and may touch USD 100 billion (Rs. 6,00,000 crores) within the next five years. Trade
in India may reach Rs. 5000-6000 crore, which is about 1% of the global trade. The
International Competence Centre for Organic Agriculture (ICCOA) estimated that the
domestic market for organic products in the year 2011-12 was Rs. 300 crore and grew to Rs.
600 crore in 2012-13 i.e. a growth rate of 100%.
Organic agricultural export market is one of the major drivers of organic agriculture in India.
India exports 31 organic products. It is estimated that more than 85% of total organic
production, excluding wild herbs from Uttar Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh, is exported. India
is best known as an exporter of organic tea and also has great export potential for many other
products. Other organic products for which India has a niche market are spices and fruits.
There is also good response for organic rice, vegetable, coffee, cashew, oil seed, wheat and
pulses. Among the fruit crops bananas, mangos and oranges are the most preferred organic
products.
State-wise major crops grown under organic farming in India (both certified & In-
conversion)
Arunachal Pradesh Maize/sorghum, Pulses, oilseeds, tea/coffee,
herbal/medicinal plants
Andhra Pradesh Cotton, maize, pulses, oilseeds, fruits and vegetables
Assam Tea/coffee, fruits and vegetables
Chhattisgarh Rice, wheat, vegetables
Delhi Wheat, vegetables
Goa Fruits, vegetables
Gujarat Cotton, pulses, oilseeds, vegetables
Haryana Basmati rice, wheat, maize, vegetables
Himachal Pradesh Wheat, fruits, vegetables
Jammu and Kashmir Spices, fruits and vegetablesKarnataka Cotton, rainfed wheat, maize, sorghum, pulses,
oilseeds, vegetables
Kerala Spices, vegetables, herbals
Manipur Spices, vegetables, herbals
Maharashtra Cotton, rice, wheat, pulses, oilseeds, spices, vegetables
Madhya Pradesh Soybean, wheat, vegetables
Meghalaya Spices, vegetables
Punjab Basmati rice, wheat, vegetables
Sikkim Maize, sorghum, vegetables, spices, herbs
Rajasthan Cotton, wheat, seed spices, vegetables
Tamil Nadu Tea, herbs, spices
Uttar Pradesh Rice, wheat, maize, vegetables
Uttarakhand Basmati rice, vegetables, maize, sorghum, herbs, spices
West Bengal Tea and vegetables
Research results of Organic farming experiments conducted at ICAR
Keeping in view, the prospective role of organic farming in mitigating the problems of
resource (soil, water, and bio-diversity) degradation and minimize the implications of climate
change on agriculture, Indian Council of Agricultural Research took up a research programme
on organic farming during 10th Five-Year Plan, by establishing a ‘Network Project on Organic
Farming (NPOF)’, to study some agronomic aspects of organic farming and develop package
of practices in arable crops at 13 centres. Further, seven new centres were approved in XII
plan to cover additional crops (seed spices and tuber crops) and areas (hilly and rainfed
regions).
Cropping Systems being experimented under Network Project on Organic farming under
ICAR
Location Cropping system
Modipuram (Uttar Pradesh) Green manure-Rice-Wheat
Basmati Rice-Potato-Radish
Babycorn-Potato-Greengram
Sorghum (F)-Pea-Okra
Jabalpur (MP) GM-Rice-Wheat
GM-Rice – potato -Okra
GM-Rice – Berseem
GM-Rice-Pea-Sorghum F
Coimbatore (TN) Maize-Cotton
Chilly-Onion
Brinjal-Sunflower
Turmeric+ Onion
Raipur (Chhatisgarh) Soybean-Wheat
Soybean-Berseem
Soybean-Mustard
Soybean-ChickpeaCalicut (Kerala) Ginger
Turmeric
Black pepper
Dharwad (Karnataka) Groundnut -Sorghum
Soybean- rainfed Wheat
Potato-Chickpea
Chilli + Cotton-Onion
Maize-Chickpea
Karjat (Maharashtra) Rice-Groundnut
Rice-Maize
Rice-Mustard
Rice-Dolichos bean
Ludhiana (Punjab) Basmati Rice-Wheat-GM
Turmeric - Onion
Maize -Potato-Moong (S)
Rice -Wheat-Moong (S)
Bhopal (MP) Soybean- Wheat
Soybean-Mustard
Soybean-Chickpea
Soybean-Isabgol
Pantnagar (Uttarakhand) Basmati Rice-Wheat-Sesbania (GM)
Basmati Rice -Lentil-Sesbania (GM)
Basmati Rice -Pea (veg.)-Sesbania(GM)
Basmati Rice -Mustard-Sesbania (GM)
Ranchi (Jharkhand) Rice -Wheat
Rice -Potato
Rice -Mustard / Linseed
Rice -Lentil
Umiam (Meghalaya) Rice - Carrot
Rice - Potato
Rice – French bean
Rice - Tomato
Analysis of research data from various centres revealed the following.
 Yield advantage (after 8th cycle across the locations): Basmati rice, soybean, garlic,
groundnut, cauliflower, tomato (4-6 %) & greengram, onion, chilli, cabbage, turmeric
(7-14 %)-
 Yield reduction (after 8th cycle across the locations): Wheat, mustard, lentil, potato,
French bean (5-8 %)
 Soil organic carbon increased by 22 % under organic production over inorganic in 6
years
 Increase in soil microbes (fungi, bacteria, actinomycetes) was observed in all locations
 Slight improvement in nutritional quality was observed in soybean, turmeric, ginger
under organic production
Minimum requirements for Organic FarmingIn organic farming system, certain minimum requirements are to be met to fulfil its objectives.
Then only the farm is certified as organic.
i) Conversion: The time between the start of organic management and certification is called
conversion period. The farmers should have a conversion plan prepared if the entire field is
not converted into organic at a time. In that case, it is necessary to maintain organic and non-
organic fields separately. In the long run the entire farm including livestock should be
converted into organic. The conversion period is decided based on the past use of the land
and ecological situation. Generally, the conversion period is two years for annual crops and
three years for perennial crops. However, the conversion period can be relaxed based on the
verification by certification agency if the requirements are fully met. During conversion, steps
should be taken to maintain bio-diversity etc. The per cent change in the yield of major crops
over the years is given in Table 2.
Table 2. Mean yield of crops tested in cropping systems under organic input management and
yield trend over the years
Crop No. Mean yield Yield trend under organic system over the years (%
of (kg/ha) under increase (+) or decrease (-) over inorganic input
obs organic input management)
erv management 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th
ati year year year year year year year
ons
Basmati rice 67 3099 -13 -14 -3 2 2 8 7
Rice 56 3639 -12 -13 5 2 1 2 1
Wheat 56 2952 -15 -9 -7 -3 -7 -13 -4
Maize 55 4541 -5 9 4 0 3 10 16
Green gram 12 905 - -4 - -9 3 13 13
Chickpea 25 1269 -10 5 9 3 0 1 5
Soybean 58 1697 1 1 5 0 3 0 12
Cotton 29 1243 8 9 11 12 11 14 12
Garlic 9 7878 -10 -19 8 15 - - -
Cauliflower 12 10683 -8 -8 4 2 - - -
Tomato 11 20577 -13 -13 -30 -28 35 26 20
Mean -6.7 -4.8 0 1 8.4 5.6 9.0
ii) Mixed farming: Animal husbandry, poultry, fisheries, etc. should be practised in addition
to agricultural farming. Shifting cultivation is not allowed. Integrated organic farming system
model is being developed at Meghalaya and Coimbatore centres under Network Project on
Organic Farming. The models could improve the net returns by 3 to 7 times compared to
existing systems (Table 3).
Table 3. Performance of integrated organic farming system modelLocation Components Area Total Net returns (Rs/year)
(ha) cost
(Rs/year)
Crop Livestock Others Total Existing
system
Coimbatore Crop (Okra, 0.40 1,10,109 64,500 8,216 1 ,600 (2 74,316 27,200*
(Tamil cotton, (87 %) (11 %) %)
Nadu) desmanthus) +
dairy (1 milch
animal, 1 heifer
& 1 bull calf) +
VC+ boundary
plantation
Umiam Crops (Cereals + 0.43 68,255 33,531 13,252 11,538 58,321 8,618**
(Meghalaya) pulses + (57 %) (22 %) (21 %)
vegetables
+fruits + fodder)
+ Dairy (1 cow +
1 calf) + Fishery
+ Vermicompost
* fingermillet-cotton-sorghum, ** rice-fallow
iii) Cropping Pattern: Crop rotation should be followed if annual crops are grown.
Intercropping should be practised when perennial crops are grown. Crop rotation should
cover green manure as well as fodder crops. In case of perennial crops, cover crops like Kolinji
(Tephrosia purpurea) should be grown to protect the soil. Monocropping should be avoided.
iv) Planting: Species and varieties cultivated should be adapted to soil and climatic condition
and resistant to pests and diseases. Seeds/Planting materials should be procured from organic
source. If not available, chemically untreated seeds/planting materials can be used one time.
Use of genetically engineered seeds or planting materials such as tissue culture, pollen
culture, transgenic plants is not allowed.
v) Manurial Policy: Soil fertility should be maintained/enhanced through raising green
manure crops, leguminous crops etc. The residues of plants after harvest should be
incorporated into the soil as far as possible. Bio-degradable materials of microbial, plant or
animal origin shall be applied as manures. (eq. compost, vermicompost, farm yard manure,
sheep penning etc.) Use of synthetic/chemical fertilisers is not permitted. The mineral based
materials like rock phosphate, gypsum, lime, etc. can be applied in limited quantities when
there is absolute necessity.
The following products are permitted for use in manuring/soil conditioning in organic fields:-
 Farm yard manure, slurry, green manures, crop residues, straw and other mulches
from own farm
 Saw dust, wood shaving from untreated wood
 Calcium chloride, lime stone, gypsum and chalk Magnesium rock
 Sodium chloride
 Bacterial preparations (Bio-fertilisers), eg. azospirillum, rhizobium
 Bio-dynamic preparations
 Plant preparation and extracts, eg. neem cake
 Vermicompost
The following products shall be used when they are absolutely needed and taking into
consideration of factors like contaminations, depletion of natural resources, nutritional
imbalances, etc. If proposing for certification, the certification agency may be consulted
before using inputs such as FYM, slurry, urine, straw etc from other farms, blood meal, bone
meal, sulphate of potash without preservatives, minerals like basic slag, sulphate of potash,
wood ash from untreated wood, and vermicompost from other farms. Identified nutrient
management package for various cropping systems through network project are given in
Table 4. Time of application of panchagavya for various crops are given in Table 5.
Table 3. Identified nutrient packages for various locations
Location Cropping System (s) Sources
Jabalpur (MP) Basmati rice-wheat-berseem Vermicompost (VC) + Farm Yard
(seed) Manure (FYM) + Non Edible Oil Cakes
(NEOC) @ 1/3 N
Coimbatore Cotton-maize-GM FYM + NEOC @ ½ N each +
(TN) Chillies-sunflower-GM Panchagavya (PG)
Raipur (CG) Rice-chickpea Enriched compost (EC) + FYM + NEOC
@ 1/3 N each + Bio dynamic (BD)+PG
Calicut Ginger-fallow FYM + Neem Cake (NC) + 2VC + PG +
(Kerala) biodynamic + Rock phosphate(RP)
Dharwad Groundnut-sorghum EC + VC + Green leaf manure (GLM) +
(Karnataka) Maize-chickpea biodynamic spray @ 12 g/ha with PG
Chilli +onion spray
Karjat Rice-red pumpkin FYM + rice straw + gliricidia @ 1/3rd
(Maharashtra) Rice-cucumber each of N during kharif and FYM + NC
+ VC @ 1/3 each of N during rabi
along with spray of PG
Ludhiana Maize-wheat-summer moong FYM + PG + BD in maize, FYM +PG in
(Punjab) wheat and FYM alone in moong
Bhopal (MP) Soybean-wheat FYM+PG + BD
Soybean-chickpea
Soybean-maizePantnagar Basmati rice-wheat FYM + VC + NC + EC @ ¼ N each + BD
(Uttarakhand) Basmati rice-chickpea + PG
Basmati rice-vegetable pea
Ranchi Rice-wheat VC+ Karanj cake (KC) + BD+ PG
(Jharkhand) Rice-potato
Umiam Rice-maize FYM + VC + PG
(Meghalaya) Rice-toria
Table 5. Time of application of Panchagavya for different crops is given as follows
Crops Time schedule
Rice 10, 15, 30 and 50th DAT
Sunflower 30, 45 and 60 DAS
Black gram Rainfed: 1st flowering and 15 DAF
Irrigated: 15, 25 and 40 DAS
Green gram 15, 25, 30, 40 and 50 DDAS
Castor 30 and 45 DAS
Groundnut 25 and 30th DAS
Bhendi 30, 45, 60 and 75 DAS
Moringa Before flowering and during pod formation
Tomato Nursery and 40 DAT: seed treatment with 1 % for 12 hrs
Onion 0, 45 and 60 DAT
Rose At the time of pruning and budding
Jasmine Bud initiation and setting
Note: DAT- Days after transplanting, DAS- days after sowing, DAF- days after flowering.
vi) Pest, Disease and Weed management: Use of synthetic/chemical pesticides, fungicides
and weedicides is prohibited. Natural enemies shall be encouraged and protected. (for e.g.
raising trees in the farm attracts birds which kills pests of the crops, nest construction etc.)
Products collected from the local farm, animals, plants and micro-organisms and prepared at
the farm are allowed for control of pests and diseases. (eq. Neem Seed Kernel Extract, cow
urine spray). Use of genetically engineered organisms and products are prohibited for
controlling pests and diseases. Similarly, use of synthetic growth regulators is not permitted.
Slash weeding is to be done between the plants. Weeds under the base of the plants shall be
cleaned and put as mulch around the plant base. The weeded materials should be applied as
mulch in the ground itself. The products that are permitted for control of pest & diseases are
Neem oil and other neem preparations like Neem Seed Kernel Extract, Chromatic traps,
Mechanical traps, Pheromone traps, Plant based repellants, Soft soap and clay. The following
products shall be used when they are absolutely necessary and taking environmental impact
into consideration. The certification agency shall be consulted before using these inputs.
 Bordeaux mixture
 Plant & animal preparations e.g. Cow urine spray, Garlic extract, Chilli extract Light mineral oils e.g. Kerosene
Natural enemies of crop pests and diseases such as Coccinellids, syrphids, spiders, Micromus,
Chrysopa and campoletis were higher under organic management compared to integrated
and inorganic management. Coccinellids, which naturally reduce the hoppers and leaf folders
was found to be two to three times higher under organic management in cotton, groundnut,
soybean, potato and maize crop fields. Similarly, spiders which also control the pests are
found to be twice higher under organic management compared to inorganic management.
The diversity of arthropod population in soil viz., Collembola, dipluran, pseudoscorpians,
cryptostigmatids and other mites population was also found to be higher under organic
management compared to integrated and chemical management (Annual Progress Report,
2010-2013, Network Project on Organic Farming, University of Agricultural Sciences,
Dharwad, Karnataka). Identified pest, disease and weed management package for various
cropping systems through network project are given in Table 6 and 7.
Table 6. Identified weed management packages for various locations
Centre Cropping System Recommended practice
Raipur (CG) Rice-mustard Conoweeder with square planting for rice
Stale seed bed for mustard
Coimbatore Rice-blackgram-GM 2 hand weeding + spray of aqueous leaf
(TN) extract at 3-4 leaf stage of weeds
Jabalpur (MP) Rice-wheat 2 hand weeding + spray at 3-4 leaf stage
aqueous spray of weeds
Dharwad Groundnut Spray of cassia and Prosppis juliflora as
(Karnataka) post emergent
Ludhiana Basmati rice-wheat High density planting + hand weeding at
(Punjab) 25-30 DAT
Pantnagar Basmati rice-wheat- one hand weeding at 25-30 DAT during
(Uttarakhand) sesbania kharif and 2 hand weeding at 25-30 and 45-
50 DAS during rabi
Umiam Maize (GC)-mustard Mulching with fresh eupatorium/ambrosia
(Meghalaya) @ 10 t/ha (after earthing up)
Table 7. Identified pest and disease management packages for various locationsCentre Cropping System Pest/disease Recommended practice
Modipuram Basmati rice-chickpea - Summer ploughing +
(Uttar Basmati rice-mustard green manure
Pradesh) incorporation
Calicut Gninger-fallow Shoot borer GEB 17 & 18, GRB 57
(Kerala)
Bajaura Cauliflower-peas- Fruit borer & Karvi (Roylea cinerea) @
(Himachal tomato Fruit rot 10% aqeous leaf extract +
Pradesh) cow urine (3%) + tween-
80 (0.05%) as emulsifier
Umiam Maize + Monolapta Derisom (3 ml/l) + PG @
(Meghalaya) Soybean Mylloceros 10% and cow urine 3%
Ephilechma Anomin 3 ml/litre or PG
Leaf folder @ 3%.
Rust PG @ 3% + lantana @
10% + vermiwash @ 10%
Preparation of bio-pesticide inputs recommended for organic farming
Name of the input Source and Preparation Time, rate and purpose of
application
Panchagavya It is a cow excreta based 3% solution was found to be
indigenous nutrient solution. most effective compared to the
Panchagavya consists of products higher and lower concentrations
viz. cow dung, cow urine, milk, investigated. 3 litres of
curd, jaggery, ghee, banana, Panchagavya to every 100 litres
Tender coconut and water. When of water is ideal for all crops.
suitably mixed and used, these
have miraculous effects. The
preparation steps of panchagavya
is as follows;
1. 7 kg. cow dung and 1 kg.
cow ghee is mixed
thoroughly and kept for 3
days.
2. After 3 days, 10 lt. cow
urine and 10 lt. water is
added, mixed and kept for
15 days with regularmixing both in morning
and evening hours.
3. After 15 days the following
ingredients are added and
mixed
 Cow milk - 3 liters
 Cow curd - 2 liters
 Tender coconut
water - 3 liters
 Jaggery - 3 kg
 Well ripened
banana – 12 nos.
Panchagavya is ready after 30
days
Lantana leaf extract Leaves of Lantana camara were The extract is diluted with water
10% collected from the nearby area of @ 10% before spraying. This
the farm and 10% aqueous leaf foliar spray act as insect-pest
extract is prepared firstly by repellent. It can be sprayed 3-4
grinding the leaves and then times during the crop duration
soaking 100g of grinded leaves in according to pest infestation.
200 ml. distilled water for 24
hours at a room temperature of
30oC. The aqueous extract was
obtained by filtering the mixture
(leaf and water) through a
Whatman No .42 filter paper and
diluted with distilled water to
prepare 10% concentration.
Derisom It is a bio-pesticide based on It is applied as foliar spray @
botanical extract of Derris indica. 0.2% or 2 ml/lt. of water. It can
be sprayed 2-3 times during the
crop duration according to pest
infestation. Derisom has
Karanjin as active principle and
acts as antifeedant and also acts
on central nervous system of the
Mites and Insect pests.
Derisom works as Acaricide
(Miticide) and Insecticide.
Pestoneem Neem biopesticide is made from It is a bio-based pest controller
cold pressed neem kernels and its containing 0.5% Azadirachtin
active azadirachtin 1500ppm is and other vital bio-energizers.
used as a general insecticide, Application of pestoneemfungicide and for coating urea for increase resistance to infestation
slow release of pest and disease.
Vermiwash It is a liquid that is collected after This liquid manure is applied as
the passage of water through a foliar spray (10% solution) to the
column of worm action in plants for better growth and
vermicomposting. It is prepared in insect-pest and disease
the vermicompost unit of management
Agronomy experimental farm,
ICAR RC for NEH Region, Barapani
Botanicals These are aqueous or alcohol These extracts are applied as
extracts of different herbs, shrubs seed treatment before sowing
or tree. These are prepared in the which stimulates plant growth
Botanicals laboratory , Division of and productivity and act as bio-
Crop Production, Agronomy pesticide too. Foliar spray and
Section, ICAR RC for NEH Region, soil drenching were also done in
Barapani some cases.
Anonine Purchased from the market Organic pesticide used as foliar
spray @ 3 ml/lit.
ITKs practiced by farmers for managing the pest and disease under organic management
Rice
 Grind one kg of garlic and mix in one litre of kerosene. Keep it overnight and filter. Mix
in 200 lit of water and spray to control brown planthopper, green leafhopper. This
practice is widely practiced in Tirunelveli district of Tamil Nadu.
 4 kg of neem leaves + 4 kg of citronella grass + 4 kg of rhizome of Alpinia galanga are
chopped and ground in a mortar. Mix the materials in 40 lit of water and leave it for a
day. Filter the mixture and dilute with water at 1:60 ratio to control stem borer and
leaf-folder.
 Ducks are allowed inside the fields after the harvest of rice crop. The ducks feed on
snails and insects found on the boundary. This is common in Trichirapalli and
Thanjavur districts of Tamil Nadu.
Millets
 Lab lab or cowpea intercropping in sorghum controls sorghum stem borer incidence.
 Application of ash during flowering phase controls earhead bugs in sorghum.
 Application of onion bulb extract (2-3 kg) control grasshoppers incidence in maize
crop.
 Planting of napier grass (2-3 rows) along the maize field border controls maize stem
borer attack.
 Intercropping of lucerne in maize crop controls maize stem borer effectively.Pulses
 Mixture of 3-5 lit of Cow urine and equal quantity of cow dung, kept for four days and
filtered. To this 200 g of lime is added and made up to 80 litre and sprayed to control
red gram pod borers.
 Spray application of butter milk in cow pea controls yellow vein mosaic virus (YMV)
disease where in the buttermilk act as a good barrier of vectors of the YMV.
 Spreading castor oil coated polythene sheet in cowpea field traps sucking pests.
 Coriander intercropping in bengalgram controls gram pod borer.
 Application of tobacco decoction mixed with soap emulsion controls aphids.
Oil seeds
 Digging trench around groundnut field and spreading Calatropis leaves in trenches kills
red hairy caterpillars trapped in trenches.
 Spreading one kg of popped sorghum grains around castor field attracts birds which
pick up semiloopers attacking castor leaves.
 Application of sand and salt crystals in leaf axils controls rhinoceros beetle in coconut.
 Spray application of diluted cow urine controls leaf webber in gingelly.
 Helicoverpa armigera in groundnut is controlled by spraying leaf extract of Prosopis
juliflora in which 200 ml of Prosopis leaf extract is mixed with 10 litres water and
sprayed. This practice is common in Thummanayakkanpatty village of Madurai district
in Tamil Nadu.
 Roasted seeds of maize or sorghum (5 kg/ac) are broadcasted in groundnut field. This
attracts birds which pick up the leaf eating caterpillars.
 Cooked rice mixed with turmeric powder is placed in castor field during morning and
late in the evening for 2 to 3 days continuously attract birds which devour the
semilooper larvae.
Vegetables
 Border cropping of Tagetes in brinjal controls shoot and fruit borer pests.
 Syrianangai Andrographis paniculata (3-5%) decoction spray controls brinjal shoot and
fruit borer, ribbed gourd stem borer, hairy caterpillar of drumstick and armyworms.
For that one kilo gram of plant is cut into small pieces and mixed with 4 lit of water
and placed in a mud pot, boiled and reduced to 1 lit and 500 ml of this extract is mixed
with 100 ml of soap solution and 9.4 lit of water and and used for spraying.
 One kg of cow dung is mixed with 10 lit of water. Filter the extract with a gunny cloth
and add 5 litres of water to the filtrate and again filter. Spray the clear filtrate on
plants to control pumpkin beetle, Epilachna beetle and pod bugs.
 Planting of coriander, mint, ginger and turmeric in mango orchards deters mango
pests.
 Application of cow urine or tobacco decoction controls insect pests in grapevines.
 Basin (Ocimum sanctum) in mango orchard acts as a trap crop for fruit flies.
Cotton
 15 lit of curd is mixed with 15 lit of water. Neem leaf extract prepared from 5 kg of
neem leaves is added to the curd and allowed for 15 days with stirring at least once in
a day. The mixture was filtered used for the management of bollworm in cotton. Deep summer ploughing, bonfires and light traps were used for red harry caterpillars.
Nipping of the terminal buds and destruction is practiced to destroy eggs and larvae
of spotted bollworm.
 Papers coated with castor oil/grease are hung at 5-6 places in the cotton field to
manage white flies. For that air is blown using a sprayer over the crop which disturbed
the adult flies and stick to the oily paper. This practice if commonly followed in
Puducherry union territory.
 The extracts of neem seeds/leaves possess insecticidal properties, which is sprayed on
the aphid-infested crops.
 Herbal pesticide formulation prepared by grounding 500g of neem seeds, 1000g of
tobacco, 100g of Acorus calamus, 250g of Asafoetida and 50g of Sapindus emarginata
seeds and the extract is sprayed for one acre cotton to control pests.
 Citrullus grandiflora (periya kumuttikai), Cissus quadrangularis (perandai kodi),
Tecoma stans (yellow arali seeds) and Azadirachta indica (neem) eaves / seeds are
ground and the paste is allowed to ferment as such for 10 days and used for the
management of cutworms.
Turmeric
 Herbal pesticide developed by Mr. K.M. Chellamuthu 1kg garlic + 500g of ginger, +
500g of green chillies + 500g of tobacco + 200g of pepper + 200ml of Neem oil + 30g
of khadi soap ckecks the most of the insect pests infecting turmeric crop. The method
of preparation is garlic was soaked in 100 ml of kerosene and kept for overnight and
then ground with green chillies and pepper the next day (A). Tobacco is to be soaked
in water for a day and then filtered and mixed with 200 ml of neem oil (B). Then the A
and B is mixed together and finally khadi soap was added and stirred well. 700 ml of
the mixture is to be diluted in 10 lit of water and sprayed. This was developed by Mr.
K.M. Chellamuthu from Kodumudi village in Erode District of Tamil Nadu.
Termite management
 The dye prepared from Noni (Morinda citrifolia) is mixed with garlic extract which
completely checked the termite ravages in trees.
 Paint prepared from 1 part of gum of Gardenia gummifera, 2 parts of Asafoetida, 2
parts of Aloe and 2 parts of castor oil cake controlled termite menace in trees.
 Application of tank silt in sandy wetlands is practiced for termite control.
 Calotropis plant material (8-10 kg) soaked in sufficient quantity of water for 24 hr and
filtered and poured on termite infested soil.
 Application of sheared human hair obtained from barber’s shop, applied on live
mounds and along the infested pathways has good control termites which is followed
Pudukottai district of Tamil Nadu.
Rat management
 Pieces of cotton or thermocole, dipped in jaggery solution, made into small packets
and spread in field / orchard. Rats which consume these will suffer from gastric
bloating disorders due to the swelling of cotton or thermocole in stomach.
 Partly cooked sorghum grains are coated with urea or cement or white cement and
packed into small packets and spread in the field. Rats that consume this mixture will
die due to gastric disorders.
 Mix powder of fused electric bulb with coconut flakes and used in coconut gardens to
manage rodents. This practice is followed in Thanjavur district of Tamil Nadu.
Herbal insect repellent A popular natural pest repellent paste mixture prepared by Tamil Nadu farmers
containing each 1kg of Vitex nigunda leaf, Agave cantala leaf , Datura methal leaves,
Calotropis leaves and neem seeds. The paste mixture is dissolved in 5 lit. of cow uring
and keep the mixture in plastic or earthen ware. Allow ht econtent to ferment for 15
days and then filter. Add 100 lit of water to the filtrate and spray in the field. Most of
the insect pests are repelled from the treated area.
vii) Soil and water conservation: Measures like stone pitching/contour wall construction are
to be taken up to prevent soil erosion. In case of saline soils, saline resistant varieties may be
grown. Judicious irrigation is to be practised. Mulching is required. Pollution of surface and
ground water shall be prevented. Clearing of primary forest is prohibited. Cleaning of land
through straw burning should be restricted to minimum.
viii) Contamination control: It is necessary to take the following measures to minimise the
contamination from outside and within farm.
If neighbouring fields are non-organic, a buffer zone should be maintained. The height of
buffer crop shall be twice the height of organic crop and the width of the buffer shall be 25-
50 feet. (When chilli is grown as the main organic crop, castor or Agathi (Sesbania) can be
grown as buffer crop. The crops from the buffer zone should be sold as non-organic).
If the farm is under conversion, equipment’s used for conventional areas shall be well cleaned
before using for organic areas.
Products based on polythene, polypropylene and other polycarbonates are allowed to cover
protected structure, insect netting, nursery, drying, etc. subject to the condition that these
materials shall be removed from the field after use and they shall not be burnt or put in the
soil. Use of polychloride based products like PVC pipe is prohibited.
ix) Processing: Processing technologies like solar drying, freeze drying, hot air chambers are
permitted. Irradiation of agricultural produce is not permitted. No synthetic additives/days
are to be added during processing.
x) Labelling: The label should convey clear accurate information on the organic status of the
product. (i.e. conversion in progress or organic). The labels for organic and conversion in
progress products should be distinguishable by different coloured labels. The details like
name of the product, quantity of the product, name and address of the producer, name of
certification agency, certification, lot number etc. are to be given in the label. Lot number is
helpful in tracing back the product particularly the field no. in which it is grown in case of
contamination. Lot no. should include the crop, country, field no, date of harvest and
production year.
xi) Packaging: For packing, recycling and reusable materials like clean jute bags, shall be used.
Use of bio-degradable materials shall also be used. Unnecessary packaging material shouldbe avoided. Organic and non-organic products shall not be stored and transported together
except when labelled
Xii) Documentation: Documentation of farm activities is must for acquiring certification
especially when both conventional and organic crops are raised. The documents/records such
as field map, field history sheet, activity register, input record, output record, harvest record,
storage, sales record, pest control records, movement records, equipment cleaning and
labelling records are to be maintained
XII) Certification Process: Certification of organic farms is required to satisfy the consumers
that the produce is totally organic. Certification agency conducts the inspection that minimum
requirements prescribed for organic agriculture is fully met and issues certificate. The
producer makes contact with certifying agency. Certification agency provides information on
standards, fees, application, inspection, certification and appeal procedures. The producer
then submits application along with field history, form map, record keeping system etc. Then
the contract indicating scope, obligation, inspection and certification, sanction and appeals,
duration, fee structure is executed. Then the Inspector of agency comes and carries out
inspection. The Inspector gives inspection report with his recommendation to the agency,
then the agency issues approval or denial of certificate. Certificate is given for current year's
harvest only and hence annual certification is required.
3. Economics of Organic Farming
The studies conducted under Network project on Organic Farming revealed that across the
locations, net return was 17 % higher (at 20-25 % premium price) under organic production
system compared to inorganic production system. The cost of cultivation was found to be 13
% higher under organic production system mainly due to handing of bulky nature of organic
manures. Benefit: Cost ratio of important cropping systems experimented under NPOF is
given below.
Cropping System (s) B:C Cropping System (s) B:C ratio*
ratio*
Babycorn -Potato-Greengram 2.38 Rice -Lentil-Sesbania (GM) 0.97
Brinjal-Sunflower 1.41 Rice -Mustard-Sesbania 1.19
(GM)
Cabbage-Radish-Capsicum 0.81 Rice -Pea (veg.)- 2.16
Sesbania(GM)
Cauliflower-Radish-Tomato 1.42 Rice-Dolichos bean 0.94
French bean-Cauliflower-French 0.86 Rice-G.Nut
bean 1.35
Ginger 1.97 Rice-Maize 1.12
Groundnut -Sorghum 3.52 Rice-Mustard 0.75
Maize-Cotton 2.60 Rice-Pea-Sorghum F 2.99
Maize-Garlic 1.83 Rice-Potato-Radish 1.91
Maize-Mustard-Radish-G. gram 1.87 Rice-Wheat-Sesbania (GM) 1.35
Maize-Potato-Okra 1.73 Sorghum (F)-Pea-Okra 2.69Potato-Chickpea 3.06 Soybean- Wheat 3.00
Rice – Berseem 3.46 Soybean-Berseem 1.58
Rice - Carrot 4.34 Soybean-Chickpea 2.11
Rice – French bean 3.18 Soybean-Isabgol 2.44
Rice -Mustard 1.04 Soybean-Mustard 1.94
Rice - Potato 2.06 Turmeric 1.91
Rice – potato -Okra 3.34 Turmeric+ Onion 1.26
Rice –Barley+mustard-Green 1.90
gram
* Benefit cost ratio worked out by taking 20 to 25 % premium price for organic products & it
is mean of over the years and across the locations
The cost of organic source of nutrients under organic cultivation varied between 28 to 85 %
of the operational cost across different crops, whereas, under non-organic cultivation, the
cost of nutrient sources predominantly constituted by inorganic sources ranged between 16
to 68 %.
Charyulu and Biswas (2010) examined the economic viability and efficiency of organic farming
in India. The study is based on farm production data from the four states viz., Punjab, Uttar
Pradesh, Gujarat and Maharashtra. A field survey was conducted in 2009-10 among 120
farmer households, 15 organic and 15 inorganic farmers in each province. The crops covered
are paddy, wheat, cotton and sugarcane. The authors also conducted a Data Envelope
Analysis (DEA) analysis using per acre figures of gross value of output and four input costs
(seeds, fertilizers, pesticides and inter-culture to measure the efficiency of organic and
conventional farming for the sample. The findings reveal that for paddy cultivation, the
organic method is less profitable than the conventional paddy farming. The net returns per
acre were less for organic paddy by 15 per cent in Punjab and 33 per cent in Uttar Pradesh
than that for conventional input-intensive paddy cultivation. In Punjab, the cost of cultivation
for organic farming was higher than its conventional counterpart though it was compensated
to some extent by premium prices for organic paddy. In contrast, the organic paddy
cultivation in Uttar Pradesh had a lower unit cost of cultivation but the lack of premium prices
rendered it less attractive than conventional cultivation. In contrast, wheat cultivation is more
remunerative when done organically than using conventional methods. In both Punjab and
Uttar Pradesh, the net returns per acre were higher for organic farming, mainly due to the
much higher output prices that organic wheat fetched in the markets.
Srikrishna sudheer (2012) compared the economics of organic farmers (N=350) and chemical
farmers (N=200) for three crops, paddy, redgram, and groundnuts, in the state of Andhra
Pradesh during 2010-11. It was found that organic farmers are earning a gross income of 5%,
10% and 7% more compared to the chemical farmers of paddy, redgram and groundnut,
respectively, and with lower input costs, the profits earned by the organic farmers are higher
by 37%, 33% and 59% for the selected crops respectively. Organic farming is generally more
profitable in terms of financial costs and returns than chemical farming, irrespective of the
crop or the size of farm (the exceptions being small redgram farms and large goundnut farms).
An analysis of the farmers’ perception of organic farming reveals that electronic media
(television) is the prime motivator for farmers to adopt organic practices.4. Scientific Constraints of Organic Farming
• Very high volume of organic materials required to meet the nutrient demand. [Eg.
Average application of 234 kg N/ha/year for a system, this requires either 46 t of raw
FYM (0.5 % N) or 15.5 t vermicompost (1.5 % N)]. Finding the right combination of
sources are essential to meet the demand?
• Efficiency of organic manures is higher than inorganic? Hence, standardization of
frequency and quantity of application of manures are essential to develop package
of practices in a system mode.
• Mismatch between time of nutrient release from organic materials and crop nutrient
demand (Mineralization of N from VC is high in first 30 days) in most of the cases
affects the yield. Hence, split application of enriched manures for various crops and
systems needs to be standardized.
• Higher incidence of weeds under organic conditions is reported by organic growers.
There is a need to identify crop specific non-chemical weed management strategies.
• Estimation of heavy metals and other residues are essential when the different kind
of organic inputs (including municipal waste) are used
• Development of climate friendly smart farms and carbon farming techniques are
essential to promote organic farming.
• While a great deal of research has been conducted on the impact of non-organic
farming systems on the environment, there are very little data available on the
positive impacts of organic farming.
• Great need for research on the human health benefits of consuming organic foods
compared to non-organic food diets. The conversation needs to be expanded beyond
the argument over “is organic more nutritious or not” and encompass full analysis of
different agriculture and food systems, their environmental impacts, and their impacts
on public health.
Constraints expressed by organic growers in Madhya Pradesh (Bhopal, Sehore and Raisen
districts, total number of organic farmers surveyed: 98)
 Lack of marketing facilities (43.7 %),
 Non availability of premium prices (39.5 %),
 Difficulty in control of weed, pest and diseases (35.4 %),
 Limited availability of organic manures (31.3 %)
5. Practical and Adaptation Measures
Developing organic farm
For optimization of productivity all the essential components need to be developed in a
systematic manner. These steps include: (i) Habitat development, (ii) on-farm facilities for
input production (iii) cropping sequence and combination planning, (iv) 3-4 year rotation plan
and (vi) growing of crops suiting to the region, soil and climate.Development of farm facilities and habitat
Infrastructure – Reserve 3-5% of farm space for utilities, such as space for cattle,
vermicompost bed, compost tank, Vermiwash/ compost tea unit etc. 5-7 trees should be
planted only on this space, as all utility infrastructure need shade. Irrigation well, water
pumping infrastructure etc can also be in this utility area. Dig some percolation tanks
(7x3x3mt or of any other size depending upon the rainfall and run-off pattern) for rain water
conservation (1 pit per ha) at appropriate places depending upon slope and water flow. If
possible develop a farm pond of preferably 20x10 mt size. Keep few 200 lit tanks (1 per acre)
for liquid manure preparation and few containers for botanicals. For 5 acre farm, develop 1-
2 vermicompost beds, 1 NADEP tank, 2 biodynamic compost beds, 2-3 compost tea/
vermiwash units, 5 liquid manure tanks, five cowpat pits and one underground cattle-urine
collection tank. Efforts should also be made to produce sufficient quantities of BD-500 (cow
horn manure) and BD-501(cow horn silica). 10-12 horn products are sufficient for 5 acre farm.
Use of biodynamic compost prepared with the use of BD-502-507 has also been found to be
very effective.
Habitat and biodiversity- Management of an appropriate habitat for sustenance of different
life forms is an essential component of organic farming. This can be achieved by ensuring crop
diversity and by maintaining a wide variety of trees and bushes as per climatic suitability.
These trees and bushes will not only ensure the nutrients from air and deep soil layers to
surface layer but also attract the birds and predators, friendly insects and also provide the
food and shelter. There may be some loss of productivity due to shading effect but that loss
can be compensated with reduced pest problems and natural biological pest control system.
In the plains, for a 10-acre farm, plant at least five to six neem trees (Azadirachta indica), one
to two tamarind (Tamarindus indica), two gular (Ficus glumerata), eight to ten ber (Zizyphus
Sp) bushes, one to two aonla (Emblica officinalis), one to two drumstick and 10–15 wild
bushes. More specifically, if we classify areas into wet and dry farms, then on the wet farms
there should be five to six neem trees, one to two wood apples, one to two star fruit, eight to
ten guava or sour soap, three to four drumstick, one to two fig and 10–15 bushes of mulberry,
star gooseberry, curry leaf etc, and on the dry farms there must be at least five to six neem,
one to two bael fruit, eight to ten ber or custard apple, one to two aonla , one to two
drumstick and 10–15 bushes of sasaka , nirgundi (Vitex negundo), Cassia auriculata, C. tora,
etc. In hilly areas, Alnus nepalensis is considered to be a wonder tree as it fixes good amount
of nitrogen. It is being promoted in a cropping system mode particularly in northeastern India.
Bushes of Prunus, oak (Quercus glauca), Pinus species along the farm boundary and yarrow
(Achillea millifolium), buck wheat (Fagopyrum esculentum), lupin (Lupinus sativus), Himalayan
stinging nettle (Urtica parviflora), marigold, etc., in between the plots invite a lot of predators
and also attract a large number of pests. Fruit orchards also need to maintain adequate
diversity with at least 3-5 types of fruit plants and few non-fruit trees (as listed above).
Conversion of soil to organic
Banning of chemicals- It is widely known fact that some biological processes of plants
involved in acquiring nutrients such as nitrogen e.g. N2 fixation are generally inhibited by
adding Nitrogen fertilizer. Soil scientists generally caution against nonjudicious fertilizer use
and encourage use of organic compost otherwise it may lead to deficiency of micronutrients.
Therefore in organic farming systems there is no place for chemicals.Low input alternative - In first year simultaneously sow three different types of legumes in
strips, first of 60 days (like moong), second of 90-120 days (Cow pea or soybean) and third of
more than 120 days (red gram) in strips. Apply mixture of Compost and vermicompost (2:1)
@ 2.5 ton per acre enriched with 4 kg Azotobacter and 4 kg PSB biofertilizers or 4 kg consortia
of customized cultures as basal dose at the time of sowing preferably in furrows below the
seeds. Seeds of legumes should be treated with crop specific strains of Rhizobium biofertilizer.
Mulch the entire surface with a thick layer of biological mulch and drench the biomass with
Jivamrut @ 200 lit per acre.
Multiple cropping and crop rotation
Mix cropping is the outstanding feature of organic farming in which variety of crops are grown
simultaneously or at different time on the same land. In every season care should be taken to
maintain legume cropping at least 40%. Mix cropping promotes photosynthesis and avoids
the competition for nutrients because different plants draw their nutrients from different
depth of soil. The legume fixes atmospheric nitrogen and make available for companion or
succeeding crops. In selecting crop combinations, it is also to be kept in mind that plants also
have their feelings, likes and dislike e.g. maize gets along well with beans and cucumber,
tomatoes go well with onions and marigold. On the other hand beans and onions do not go
well with each other. Entire farm should have at least 8-10 types of crops at all the times. Each
field/ plot should have at least 2-4 types of crops out of which one should be legume. In case
if only one crop is taken in one plot then adjacent p