Lecture Notes
on
Climatology
For
Integrated Meteorological Training Course
By
Gaurishankar Sawaisarje
Scientist D
India Meteorological Department
Meteorological Training Institute
Pashan, Pune-8
267CHAPTER 1
CLIMATOLOGY AND ITS APPLICATIONS
1. Climatology: An Atmospheric Science
Atmospheric scientists often subdivide study of complexity of gaseous envelope that
surrounds the earth into specific areas of interest. One such division identifies the fields of
meteorology and climatology. Meteorology is a science that deals with motion and the
phenomena of the atmosphere with a view to both forecasting weather and explaining the
processes involved. It deals largely with status of atmosphere over a short period of time and
utilizes physical principles to attain its goal. Climatology is the study of atmospheric
conditions over a longer period of time. It includes the study of different kinds of weather
that occur at a place. Dynamic change in the atmosphere brings about variation and
occasionally great extremes that must be treated on the long term as well as the short term
basis. As a result, climatology may be defined as the aggregate of weather at a place over a
given time period.
There is diversity of approaches available in climate studies. Figure 1. Illustrates the
major subgroups of climatology, the approaches that can be used in their implementation, and
the scales at which the work can be completed.
Figure 1. Subgroups, Analytical methods and scales of climatic study.
(From J. E. Olive 1981, P4 used by permission of V. H. Winston and Sons.)
268Climatography consists of the basic presentation of data and its verbal or cartographic
description.
Physical Climatology deals largely with the energy exchanges and physical components.
Dynamic Climatology is more concerned with atmospheric motion and exchanges that lead
to and result from that motion.
Applied Climatology is the scientific application of climatic data to specific problems within
such areas of forestry, agriculture, and industry. It can involve the application of climatic data
and theory of other disciplines, such as geomorphology and soil science.
The analytical approaches suggested in the above figure 1. are self-explanatory, with
the possible exception of the synoptic approach, an analytic method that combines each of the
others. The object of synoptic climatology is to relate local or regional climates to
atmospheric circulation.
2692. Temperature structure of the atmosphere
In general terms, the atmosphere can be considered as a series of concentric layers or
shells surrounding the earth. The most commonly used method to describe atmospheric
layering uses temperature as the variable. This is illustrated in Figure 2. , which shows
temperature changes with height.
The troposphere is the lowest level, where “weather” occurs. In this layer, there is
generally uniform decrease of temperature with height. The lowest part of the troposphere, up
to 1.5 km or 2 km is called friction layer. The upper limit of the troposphere is the
tropopause. It is zone where generally decrease of temperature ceases and temperature
remains fairly constant with height (isothermal-equal temperature). The tropopause also
represents the upper limit of large scale turbulence and mixing of the layer.
The stratosphere extends from the 10 km to 45 km above the surface. In this lower
section, temperatures are fairly constant, but at an elevation of 30 km they increase toward
the upper limit of this zone, the stratospause. Air circulation in the stratosphere is
characteristically persistent, with winds blowing at high velocities.
The mesosphere, above the stratopause, is identified by a marked temperature
decrease with altitude. Beginning at an elevation of about 80 km, the decline continues until
the mesopause is reached.
The thermosphere lying above the mesopause has no defined upper limit. It is so
named because a very high thermodynamic temperature attained.
Figure 2. Thermal Structure of Atmosphere
270Figure 3. Schematic cross section of Earth's Atmosphere showing
broad chemical dividions
2713. Applications of Climatology
Climatology is a fascinating area of study. It relates directly in which the environment
functions and the everyday lives of people in addition to workings and nature of the
atmosphere. Applied Climatology is used to –
a) Improve efficiency of various economic activities that are influenced by climate,
b) Aid in the needs of societal activities,
c) Reduce the losses incurred from climatic hazards.
Consider the following examples:
Energy: Climate plays a part in the use and development of both fossil fuels and the
renewable energy sources. The use of fossil fuels to generate energy is so climate related that
the concept of heating and cooling degree days is used by engineers to estimate energy
demands. The potential an area has for the development of renewable sources is directly
related to the atmospheric conditions. To evaluate the potential for the direct use of solar
energy and wind power requires detailed knowledge of the climatic conditions that prevail.
Food: The success of agriculture is determined by how well farmers adapt their crops and
activities to climate.
Water: Many human problems are related to excesses or deficits of water. The applied
climatologist supplies important information on everything from the chances of flood
occurring to the relative severity of the flood as well as his concern with drought includes the
environmental degradation that can result when a location experiences slowing increasing
aridity.
Health: Studies of the relationships between health, disease, mortality, and climate show
some remarkable results. Climate influences the relative merits of a location as a health
resort or as a tourist center. The effect of climates at high altitudes provides an apt example of
the hazard.
Industry and Trade: Applied climatologists have a significant input into the industrial
and trade sectors of an economy. For example,
a) Building and construction: site conditions, design in relation to climate, energy costs,
construction conditions.
b) Commerce: Storage of materials, accidents, plant operation, sales planning
c) Communication: Construction, maintenance of systems, appropriate design
d) Services: Insurance, environmental law, disaster control
e) Forestry: Productivity, hazards, regeneration, biological hazards.
At first glance, it may be difficult to accurately assess the relationship of climatology
to many of these activities. However, a little thought will clearly indicate the significance of
applied climatology.
272CHAPTER 2
CLIMATIC ELEMENTS
2.1 Weather elements
The weather elements that are used to describe climate are also the elements that
determine the type of climate for a region. The most important elements of weather which in
different combinations make up the climate of a particular place or area are: solar radiation,
air temperature, air pressure, wind velocity and wind direction, humidity and precipitation,
and amount of cloudiness. The climatic elements of temperature, precipitation, and wind are
the most significant elements used to express the climate of a region.
Temperature:
The temperature of an area is dependent upon
a) latitude or the distribution of the incoming and outgoing radiation,
b) the nature of the surface (land or water),
c) the altitude and the
d) prevailing winds.
The air temperature normally used in climatology is that recorded at the surface. Moisture or
lack of moisture modifies the temperature. The more moisture in a region, the smaller the
temperature range, and the drier the region, the greater the temperature range. Moisture is
also influenced by temperature. Warmer air can hold more moisture than a cooler air,
resulting in increased evaporation and a higher probability of clouds and precipitation.
Moisture, when coupled with condensation and evaporation, is an extremely important
climatic element. It ultimately determines the type of climate for a specific region.
Precipitation:
Precipitation is the second most important climatic element. In most studies,
precipitation is defined as water reaching Earth’s surface by falling either in a liquid or a
solid state. The most significant forms are rain and snow. Precipitation has a wide range of
variability over the earth’s surface. Because of its variability, a longer series of observations
is generally required to establish mean or an average. It often becomes necessary to include
such factors as average number of days with precipitation and average amount per day.
Precipitation is expressed in millimeters. Since precipitation amounts are directly associated
with amounts and type of clouds, cloud cover must also be considered with precipitation.
Cloud climatology also includes phenomena such as fog and thunderstorms.
273Wind:
Wind is the climatic element that transports heat and moisture into a region.
Climatologists are mostly interested in wind with regards to its direction, speed, and
gustiness. Wind is therefore usually discussed in terms of prevailing direction, average
speeds, and maximum gusts. Some climatological studies use resultant wind, which is the
vectorial average of all wind directions and speeds for a given level, at a specific place, and
for a given period.
2.2 Expression of climatic elements
Climatic elements are observed over long periods of time; therefore, specific terms must be
used to express these elements so they have a definite meaning.
Mean (Average):
The mean is the most commonly used climatological parameter. The term mean
normally refers to a mathematical averaging obtained by adding the values of all factors or
cases and then dividing by the number of items. For example, the average daily temperature
would be the sum of the hourly temperatures divided by 24.
The mean temperature of 1 day has been devised by simply adding the maximum and
minimum temperature values for that day and dividing by 2. In analyzing weather data, the
terms average and mean are often used interchangeably.
Normal:
In climatology, the term normal is applied to the average value over aperiod of time,
which serves as a standard with which values (occurring on a date or during a specified time)
may be compared. These periods of time may be a particular month or other portion of the
year. They may refer to a season or to a year as a whole. The normal is usually determined
over a 20- or 30-year period.
Absolute:
In climatology, the term absolute is usually applied to the extreme highest and lowest
values for any given meteorological element recorded at the place of observation and are
most frequently applied to temperature.
Extreme:
The term extreme is applied to the highest and lowest value for a particular
meteorological element occurring over a period of time. This period of time is usually a
matter of months, seasons or years. The term may be used for a calendar day only, for which
it is particularly applicable to temperature. At time the term is applied to the average of the
highest and lowest temperatures as mean monthly or mean annual extremes.
274Range:
Range is the difference between the highest and lowest values and reflects the
extreme variations of these values. Since it has a high variability, this statistic is not
recommended for precise work. Range is related to extreme values of record and can be
useful in determining the extreme range for the records available.
Frequency:
Frequency is defined as the number of times a certain value occurs within a specified
period of time. A frequency distribution may be used to present a condensed presentation of
large data.
Mode:
Mode is defined as the value occurring with the greatest frequency or the value about
which the most cases occur.
Median:
The median is the value at the midpoint in an array. It is determined by arranging all
values in order of size. Rough estimates of the median may be obtained by taking the middle
value of an ordered series; if there are two middle values they may be averaged to obtain the
median. The median is not widely used in climatological computations. A longer period of
record might be required to formulate an accurate median.
Degree-Day:
A degree-day is the number of degrees the mean daily temperature is above or below
a standard temperature base. Degree days are accumulated over a season. At any point in the
season, the total can be used as an index of past temperature effect upon some quantity, such
as plant growth, fuel consumption, power output, etc. Degree-days are frequently applied to
fuel and power consumption in the form of heating degree-days and cooling degree-days.
275Average and standard deviations
In the analysis of climatological data, it may be desirable to compute the deviation of
all items from a central point. This can be obtained from a computation of either the mean (or
average) deviation or the standard deviation. These are termed measures of dispersion and are
used to determine whether the average is truly representative or to determine the extent to
which data vary from the average.
Average deviation :
Average deviation is obtained by computing the arithmetic average of the deviations
from an average of the data.
Average deviation = ∑ d / n
where d (the deviations) and n is the number of items.
Standard deviation:
Standard deviation is the measure of the scatter or spread of all values in a series of
observations.
Standard deviation = SQRT( ∑ d2 / n)
where d2 is the sum of the squared deviations from the arithmetic average, and n is the
number of items in the group of data.
276CHAPTER 3
CLIMATIC ZONES AND CLIMATIC CONTROLS
3.1 Climatic zones
The basic grouping of areas into climatic zones consists of classifying climates into
five broad belts based on astronomical or mathematical factors. Actually they are zones of
sunshine or solar climate and include the torrid or tropical zone, the two temperate zones, and
the two polar zones.
The tropical zone is limited on the Tropic of Cancer and on the south by the Tropic of
Cancer which are located at 23 1/2º north and south latitude, respectively.
The temperate zone of the Northern Hemisphere is limited on the south by the Tropic
of Cancer and on the north by the Arctic Circle located at 66 1/2º north latitude. The
temperate zone of the Southern Hemisphere is bounded on the north by the Tropic of
Capricorn and on the south by the Antarctic Circle located at 66 1/2º south latitude.
The two polar zones are the areas in the Polar Regions which have the Arctic and
Antarctic Circles as their boundaries.
Technically, Climatic zones are limited by isotherms rather than by parallels of
latitude. A glance at any chart depicting the isotherms over the surface of the earth shows the
isotherms do not coincide with latitude lines. The astronomical or latitude zones therefore
differ from the zones of heat.
The Climatic zones are shown below:
277Electromagnetic energy travels in waves and spans a broad spectrum from very
long radio waves to very short gamma rays. The human eye can only detect only a small
portion of this spectrum called visible light. Our Sun is a source of energy across the full
spectrum, and its electromagnetic radiation bombards our atmosphere constantly. However,
the Earth's atmosphere protects us from exposure to a range of higher energy waves that can
be harmful to life. Examples are Gamma rays, x-rays, and some ultraviolet waves.
Electromagnetic radiation is reflected or absorbed mainly by several gases in the Earth's
atmosphere, among the most important being water vapor, carbon dioxide, and ozone. Some
radiation, such as visible light, largely passes (is transmitted) through the atmosphere. These
regions of the spectrum with wavelengths that can pass through the atmosphere are referred
to as "atmospheric windows." Some microwaves can even pass through clouds, which make
them the best wavelength for transmitting satellite communication signals.
The Electromagnetic spectrum is shown below:
278Figure 4. Eectromagnetic Spectrum
279The cause of seasons is due to orbit of the earth round the sun. This is shown below.
Winter -December to February.
Spring-March to May.
Summer-June to August.
Fall(autumn)-September to November
Figure 5. Orbit of the Earth round the Sun
However, On the basis of climate, the period of year has been divided into four seasons in India.
They are:-
1) Cold weather season (winter season) – January and February
2) Pre-monsoon or Hot weather season – March to May
3) SW or Summer Monsoon season – June to September
4) Post monsoon season – October to December
2803.2 Climatic Controls
The variation of climatic elements from place to place and from season to season is
due to several factors called climatic controls. Four climatic controls largely determine the
climate of every ocean and continental region. These controls are latitude, land and water
distribution, topography, and ocean currents. Another factor, which is now significant in
determining a region’s climate, is man. Man’s influence on climate through pollution,
deforestation, and irrigation, is now considered as climatic factor.
Latitude:
Latitude (or the position of earth relative to the Sun) has a marked effect on climatic
elements. The angle at which rays of sunlight reach Earth and the number of Sun hours each
day depends upon the distance of the Sun, from the equator. Therefore, the latitude directly
influences the sources and direction of air masses and the weather they bring with them into a
region.
Land and Water Distribution
Location of continents and oceans greatly influences Earth’s pattern of air
temperature as well as the sources of movement of air masses.
(a) Influence of Air Temperature
Coastal areas assume the temperature characteristics of the land or water that is on
their windward side. In latitude of prevailing westerly winds, for example, west coasts of
continents have oceanic temperatures and east coasts have continental temperatures which are
determined by wind flow. Mixing process in the upper layer of the ocean sharply reduces air
temperature contrasts between day and night and between winter and summer over oceanic
areas. Strong seasonal and diurnal contrasts exist in the interior continents due to lack of
redistribution of heat by turbulence and negligible effect of conduction. In the Southern
Hemisphere, the temperature gradient does not have as great a seasonal change as it does in
the Northern Hemisphere due to more water surface in Southern Hemisphere and tapering of
continents of Southern Hemisphere towards the poles.
The distribution of water vapor and clouds is another important factor influencing air
temperature. In areas with high percentage of clouds the solar energy is easily trapped in the
lower layers due to the greenhouse effect. Thus, areas of high moisture content have
relatively high temperature.
(b) Influence on Air Circulation
The higher mean temperature of Northern Hemisphere is an effect of higher
percentage of land and warmer oceans in Northern Hemisphere due to the movement of warm
equatorial waters from the Southern Hemisphere in to the Northern Hemisphere caused by
the southeast trades crossing the equator. Another factor is the partial protection of oceans of
Northern Hemisphere from cold polar waters and arctic ice by land barriers. There is no such
barrier between the Antarctic region and the southern oceans.
281Figure 6. How Sun Angle decreases the intensity of radiation
Figure 7. The tilted axis of the earth results in variations of the angle of overhead sun
and length of daylight. Diagram shows conditions at the equinoxes and solstices
282Topography:
Topography plays an extremely important role in determining the climate of a region.
The height of an area above sea level exerts a considerable influence on its climate. All
climatic values are affected by surface elevation. An important influence on climate is
mountainous terrain, especially, the long, high chains of mountains that act as climatic
divides. The orientation of the mountain range may block certain air masses and prevent them
from reaching the lee side of the mountains. For example, the Himalayas which are east-west
orientations prevent polar air masses from advancing southward. Therefore the climates of
India are warmer in winter than are other locations of the same latitude. The most noted
influence of mountains is the distribution of precipitation (higher values of precipitation on
windward side than on the leeward side). Another important topographical feature is the
presence of lakes. The lake effect can be notable for large, unfrozen bodies of water. The lee
sides of lakes show considerable diurnal and annual modification in the form of more
moderate temperatures; increased moisture, cloud and precipitation; and increased winds (due
to less friction) and land and sea breeze effects.
Ocean currents:
Ocean currents play a significant role in controlling the climate of certain regions.
Ocean currents transport heat moving cold polar water equator ward into warmer waters and
moving the warm equatorial water pole ward into cooler waters. Currents are driven by the
major wind systems; therefore, cold southward moving currents flow along the west coasts of
continents, and the warm northward moving currents flow along the east coasts of the
continents. This is true in both hemispheres. Basically, this results in cooler climates along
the west coasts and the warmer climates along the east coasts.
283CHAPTER 4
GENERAL CIRCULATION OF THE ATMOSPHERE OVER THE GLOBE
4.1 Scales of Atmospheric motion
The time and size scales for atmospheric motions are given in Table below:
Scale Time Scale Distance Scale Examples
Macro scale
Planetary Weeks to longer 1000-40,000 km Westerlies and
trade winds
Synoptic Days to weeks 100-5000 km Mid-latitude
cyclones,
anticyclones and
hurricanes, Tropical
cyclones
Meso scale Minutes to hours 1-100 km Thunderstorms,
tornadoes, and
land-sea breeze
Micro scale Second to < 1 km Turbulence, dust
minutes devils, and gusts
4.2 Large and small scale circulation
The wind systems shown in figure below illustrate the three major categories of
atmospheric circulation: macroscale, mesoscale, and microscale. Macroscale circulation
includes large planetary-scale flow, such as trade winds that blow consistently for weeks to
longer as well as smaller features like Tropical cyclones. Mesoscale circulation is associated
with tornadoes, thunderstorms, and numerous local winds that generally last from minutes to
hours. Finally, microscale events have life span of from a few seconds to minutes and include
dust devils, gusts, and general atmospheric turbulence.
284Before examining the large macroscale circulation for Earth, let us turn to some mesoscale
winds:
Land and Sea Breezes
Land is heated more intensely during day light hours than is an adjacent body of
water. As a result, the air above the land surface heats and expands, creating an area of low
pressure. A sea breeze then develops, as cooler air over the water moves onto the land. At
night, the reverse may take place; the land cools more rapidly than the sea and a land breeze
develops.
285Mountain and Valley Breezes
During the day, air along the mountain slopes is heated more intensely than air at the
same elevation over the valley floor. This warmer air glides up along the mountain slope and
generates a valley breeze. These can often be identified by the isolated cumulus clouds that
develop over the adjacent mountain peaks. During night time, rapid radiation heat loss along
the mountain slopes cools the air, which drains into the valley below and causes a mountain
breeze.
286Chinook (Foehn) winds
These are often created when a strong pressure gradient develops in a mountainous
region. As the air descends the leeward slopes of the mountains, it is heated adiabatically and
becomes drier. These winds often bring drastic change and melting snow cover over the
ground in short order. The Native American word Chinook means “snow eater”.
Katabatic (Fall) winds
These winds originate when cold air, situated over a highland area such as the ice sheets of
Greenland or Antarctica, is set in motion. Under the influence of gravity, the cold air
cascades over the rim of a highland like a water fall. although the air is heated adiabatically,
the initial temperatures are so low that the wind arrives in the lowlands still colder and more
dense than the air it displaces. Examples are mistral which blows from the French Alps
towards the Mediterranean Sea, bora, which originates in the mountains of Yugoslavia and
blows to the Adriatic Sea.
4.3 Three Cell Circulation Model
This was proposed for each hemisphere in the 1920’s and has been modified to fit upper –air
observations, it remains a useful way to examine global circulation. Hadley in 1735 was well
aware that solar energy drives the winds and proposed that the large temperature contrast
between the poles and the equator creates one large convection cell in each hemisphere
(northern and southern).
In the zones between the equator and roughly 30º latitude north and south, the circulation
closely resembles the model used by Hadley for the whole earth. Near the equator, the warm
rising air that releases latent heat during the formation of cumulus towers is believed to
provide the energy to drive the Hadley cells. As the flow aloft in the Hadley cells moves
poleward, it begins to subside in a zone between 20º and 35º latitude due the two reasons, viz.
(1) as upper level flow moves away from the stormy equatorial region, where the release of
latent heat condensation keeps the air warm and buoyant, radiation cooling increases the
density of air. (2) because of Coriolis force becoming stronger with increase of distance from
the equator, the poleward moving upper air is deflected into a nearly west to east flow by the
time it reaches 25º latitude. A convergence is formed aloft due to the Coriolis force and
results in subsidence. Consequently, this zone of subsidence is the site of the world’s
subtropical deserts (Sahara desert of North Africa, the great Australian desert). Due to
general weak winds in this zone, the region is popularly known as the horse latitudes. From
the center of the horse latitudes, the surface flow splits in to two branches: Equatorward flow
deflected by Coriolis force to form reliable trade winds. In the northern hemisphere the trades
are from the northeast, where as in the southern hemisphere the trades are from the southeast.
The trade winds from both the hemispheres meet at the equator in a region that has a weak
pressure gradient which is known as doldrums.
287The circulation between 30º and 60º latitude (north and south) is more complicated. The net
surface flow is poleward, and because of the Coriolis force, the winds have strong westerly
component. Relatively little is known about the circulation in high (polar) latitudes. It is
understood that subsidence at the poles produces a surface flow that moves equatorward and
is deflected into the polar easterlies of both hemispheres. The meeting of cold polar winds
moving equatorward with the warmer westerly flow of the mid latitudes is named as polar
front.
4.4 Observed distribution of Pressure and winds
If earth had a uniform surface, two latitudinally oriented belts of high and two of low
pressure would exist as shown in figure below. Near the equator, the warm rising branch of
the Hadley cells is associated with the pressure zone, known as the equatorial low which is
marked by abundant precipitation. Because it is a region where both the trade winds
converge, it is referred to inter tropical convergence zone.
288Up to this point, we have only considered the global pressure systems as it they were
continuous belts around Earth. However, because the Earth’s surface is not uniform, the only
true zonal distribution of pressure exists along the sub polar low in the Southern Hemisphere.
To a lesser extent, the equatorial low is also continuous. At other latitudes, particularly in the
northern hemisphere, the zonal pattern is replaced by semi permanent cells of high and low
pressure.
289January Pressure and Wind patterns
Figure 4 (a) shows a very strong high pressure center, called the Siberian
High, over the frozen landscape of northern Asia. The polar highs are prominent features of
the winter circulation over the northern continents. Two intense semi permanent low pressure
centers (the Aleutian low and the Icelandic low) are situated over the North Pacific and North
Atlantic respectively. These regions are always experiencing low pressure and hence the term
semi permanent. The areas affected by these lows experience cloudy conditions and abundant
winter precipitation.
July Pressure and Wind patterns
During the summer months, the sub tropical highs in the Northern Hemisphere
migrate westward and become more intense than during the winter months. These strong high
pressure centers dominate the summer circulation over the oceans and pump warm moist air
on to the continents that lie to the west of these highs. This results in an increase in
precipitation over parts of eastern North America and Southeast Asia. During the peak of the
summer monsoon, the subtropical high is found in the North Atlantic is positioned near the
island of Bermuda, hence the name Bermuda high.
290291CONTENTS
Chapter 1: Winter Season
Chapter 2: Premonsoon Season
Chapter 3: SW or Summer Monsoon Season
Chapter 4: Post Monsoon Season
292(Ref. used for these notes: Indian Climatology by N C Biswas)
CHAPTER 1
WINTER SEASON
1.1 Climatic Pattern
January is taken as the representative month for the winter season. Winter conditions
commence over North India from December itself.
1.1.1 Mean Sea Level Pressure
Siberian High (45ºN / 105ºE) in the northern hemispheric winter is the most intense
high pressure cell over the globe. India is at the southern periphery of this high.
Pressure gradient is stronger to the north of Himalayas and weaker over India. A
weak ridge runs from West Rajasthan to central parts of Bihar and a prominent ridge
runs along the east coast.
A trough extends from Kerala to Gujarat and another from Tennasserim coast to
Assam.
2931.1.2 Surface winds
Surface winds are mainly from northeast to the south of 25ºN both over land and sea.
North of 25ºN and west of 88ºE, the winds are mainly north-westerly. However, easterlies
prevail over Assam. Mean wind speed is light over the land and about 10 kts over the sea
areas.
1.1.3 Upper Level winds
The subtropical high pressure belt, which is almost a permanent feature over the globe
throughout the year, is marked throughout the troposphere and defines the wind flow. The
winds are westerlies to the north of the sub tropical edge and easterlies to its south
At 850 hPa level, the subtropical ridge runs over India and neighbourhood between
18ºN and 20ºN. It tilts southward with height. It runs roughly along 12ºN and 500 hPa and
along 8ºN at 200 hPa levels.
The westerly winds strengthen with height over north India between 25ºN and 30ºN.
The wind speed in this belt is about 40 kts at 500 hPa. About 75 kts at 300 hPa and 85 kts at
200 hPa levels. Beyond 200 hPa the wind speed gradually decreases.
2942951.1.4 Temperature
1.1.4.1 Mean Maximum Temperature (January)
Peninsular India, south of 20º N is comparatively warmer than to the north. Mean
maximum temperature to the south of 20º N is 30º C or more. It decreases northward and
becomes 5º C or below over Kashmir. Thermal gradient over India to the south of 30º N is
somewhat flat but increases rapidly to the north of it. The isotherms are more or less parallel
to the latitudes over north India.
1.1.4.2 Mean Minimum Temperature (January)
Night minimum temperatures over extreme south Peninsula are more than 20º C.
They decrease northwards and become below 0º C over Ladak and neighbourhood. They are
below 10º C to the north of 23º N. The isotherms run more or less parallel to the latitudes
except in coastal areas.
2961.1.4.3 Diurnal Range of Temperature (January)
Diurnal range of temperature is more than 10º C over the entire Indian subcontinent
except in the coastal areas of Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Kerala and Karnataka and
Kashmir where it is less than 10º C It is greater than 15º C over NW India, Saurashtra and
Kutch, West Madhya Pradesh. North Maharashtra and Telangana and is between 10º C and
15º C elsewhere
1.1.4.4 Upper Air Temperature (January)
Temperature decreases with height upto 200 hPa level during the season. Also
temperature decreases northwards from 15º N at all levels between 850 hPa and 300 hPa
levels. Thermal high in the upper air lies to the south of 15º N at 200 hPa level. Temperature
over India is somewhat flat and lies within 2º C of 51º C. Above 200 hPa level, the
temperature gradient is reversed.
2971.1.5 Rainfall (January and February)
The winter rainfall over India is a small percentage of the annual rainfall except in
Kashmir and neighbourhood. It is more than 20 cm over Kashmir, Punjab, Haryana,
Himachal Pradesh, NW Uttar Pradesh, Northeastern states Bihar Plateau and adjoining
Madhya Pradesh, Orissa, coastal and southern parts of interior Tamil Nadu and South Kerala
receive more than 5 cm of rainfall during the season. It is less than 1 cm over Western parts
of India extending from west Rajasthan in the north to south Karnataka in the south and
between 1 and 5 cm in the remaining parts of India.
Rainfall over northern India occurs in association with the passage of western
disturbances and induced systems and in the south peninsula due to the movement of easterly
waves.
2981.1.6 Normal Weather during Winter Season in India
Normally the weather is dry over India during the winter season, clear sky, low
humidity; low mean temperature with large diurnal range of temperatures is the normal
weather pattern over India during the season. However, the dry spell is broken at intervals
with the passage of western disturbances across North India and Easterly waves across
extreme south Peninsula
1.2 Synoptic Feature
The common synoptic features during the season are (1) Western disturbances and
induces systems
(ii) Trough in middle and upper tropospheric westerlies.
(iii) Sub-tropical Westerly jet.
The above disturbances affect the weather over northern and adjoining central India.
The extreme south peninsula of India is affected by
(iv) Easterly Waves.
2991.2.1 Western Disturbances (W.D) and Induced Systems.
A western Disturbance is a synoptic system in mid latitude westerly winds which
moves from west to east across north India. It can be seen as a low pressure area over north
Pakistan and neighbourhood which is extended atleast up 0.9 km. a.s.l. as a cyclonic
circulation (CYCIR) or trough or as a CYCIR/trough in the lower troposphere. Normally the
disturbances affect Indian subcontinent to the north of Lat. 30º N. The WDs are often
associated with a trough in the middle and upper troposphere, which tilts westward with
height.
When two or more closed isobars at an interval of 2 hPa can be drawn on sea level
chart over north Pakistan and adjoining Punjab then the W.D is referred to as Western
Depression. The WDs develop over Mediterranean Sea, Black Sea and Caspian Sea. On
some occasions its origin can be traced to Atlantic Ocean.
Occasionally under the influence of WDs, lows or CYCIRs develop in the lower
troposphere over Rajasthan and west Madhya Pradesh (south of Lat. 30N). These
disturbances are referred to as Induced Systems. Movement of induced systems is about 5
per day or less. However, faster movement occurs under the influence of mid or upper
tropospheric trough.
Life period of a sequence of WDs per month including the Induced lows move across
India during winter season. They are less frequent in post – monsoon and pre monsoon
season. Their frequency is 2 to 4 in Nov & Dec., about 5 in March and April and 2 to 3 in
May.
Weather associated with the western disturbances are (i) Precipitation (ii) Cold wave
condition and (iii) Fog.
(i) Precipitation
Precipitation in association with a W.D first commences over Jammu and
Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh, Punjab and Haryana and the next day over East Rajasthan and
West Uttar Pradesh. Many times rainfall may cease at this stage. In some cases, rainfall belt
extends southwards to Madhya Pradesh and during the following 2 days (though not always)
it spreads to east Uttar Pradesh Bihar, Orissa, West Bengal and Sikkim and Assam. Even the
disturbance which does not affect NW India south of 30 N sometimes causes precipitation
over Assam & Arunachal Pradesh 2 to 3 days after the weather over western Himalayas.
300Precipitation normally occurs in the forward sector of a WD as a thundershower.
Hails also occur over north India in association with the WDs. The higher reaches of western
Himalayas, Sikkim and Arunachal Pradesh often get snowfall.
(ii) Cold wave
Cold wave conditions are generally experienced during November to March. It is a
relative term with respect to night minimum temperatures.
Criteria for cold wave
As per decisions of AMR 2002, it has been decided that the following revised criteria
for declaring of cold wave may be introduced w.e.f 1st March 2002.
Wind chill factor plays an important role and brings down the actual minimum
temperature depending upon the wind speed. The actual minimum temperature of a station
should be reduced to wind chill effective minimum temperature (WCTn) based on wind chill
factor using the enclosed table enclosure I WMO No 331/Tech note No. 123 on “The
assessment of human bio climate. A limited review of physical parameters 1972)
For declaring cold wave and Cold day WCTn should only be used.
If WCTn is 10 C or less, then only the conditions for cold wave should be considered.
When normal minimum temperature is equal to 10º C or more
Cold wave Departure from normal is – 5º C to 6º C
Severe cold wave Departure from normal is – 7º C or less
When normal minimum temperature is less than 10º C
Cold wave Departure from normal is – 4º C to – 5º C
Severe cold wave Departure from normal is -6º C or less
When WCTn is 0º C or less, cold wave should be declared irrespective of normal
minimum temperature of the station. However, this criteria is not applicable for those
stations whose normal minimum temperature is below 0 C
301Cold day
In the plains of north India, foggy conditions prevail during winter for several days or
weeks. The minimum temperature on these days remain above normal, while maximum
temperature remain much below normal. This creates cold conditions for prolonged period.
To cover such situations the concept of cold day is introduced.
When maximum temperature is less than or equal to 16º C in plains it be
declared “Cold Day”
Cold wave conditions for coastal stations.
For coastal stations the threshold value of minimum temperature of 10 C is rarely
reached. However, the local people feel discomfort due to wind chill factor which reduces
the minimum temperature by few degrees depending upon the wind speed. The cold day
concept may be used following the criteria below:-
Criteria for describing “cold day” for coastal stations
i) Actual minimum temperature of a station be reduced to WCTn
ii) This WCTn should be used to declare cold wave or cold day
iii) When minimum temperature departure is – 5º C or less over a station cold day may be
described irrespective of threshold value of 10º C
iv) However, when a threshold of 10º C is reached “cold wave” be declared
v) When a station satisfies both the cold wave and cold day criteria when cold wave has
a higher priority and has to be declared.
Heat wave/ cold wave and hot day cold day are area specific phenomena. Therefore,
they may be described for Met sub division or a part thereof, when at least two stations
satisfy the criteria.
Cold waves occur in the rear sector of western disturbances. The lowest temperatures
in cold wave are generally reached on the second night of the cold spell, when the minimum
temperatures have dropped as much as 10º C to 12º C below normal.
Cold waves may enter NW India from Pakistan or develop over NW India. They
usually spread eastwards upto West Bengal and southwards to Telangana. On some
occasions a cold wave may intensify over Bihar or East Uttar Pradesh.
Severe cold waves occur over NW India, West Uttar Pradesh, Gujarat, Madhya
Pradesh and Vidarbha between December and April. Occasionally they extend eastwards to
east Uttar Pradesh or Bihar. A spell of cold wave usually lasts for about 4 to 5 days and on
rare cases 7 to 10. However, over a region it is normally observed for not more than a couple
of days. Severe cold wave conditions are generally observed from November to March.
Jammu and Kashmir is most affected by severe cold wave approx 4 spells per year.
302(iii) Fog
Fog is localized phenomenon. It is suspension of very small water droplets in the air
reducing the horizontal visibility to less than 1 km. with relative humidity 75 percent or more.
Fog can be classified into 4 types based on the process which causes its formation
a) Radiation Fog Forms mainly due to radiation cooling of surface at night.
b) Advection Fog forms when moist air is transported over colder surface
c) Steaming Fog Caused by the evaporation form warm water into colder air.
d) Frontal Fog is formed by continuous rain ahead of a warm front.
Radiation and Advection fog occur mostly over north India in winter. Conditions
favourable for Radiation fog are
a) High Relative Humidity (b) cloud free sky (c) Light wind and
(d) A stable layer with inversion above ground.
In association with western disturbance conditions become favourable for the
occurrence of fog over large areas mainly in its rear sector and sometimes ahead of it. The
low level moisture content, stability and wind field conditions become favourable for its
formation. In the rear sector of the western disturbance radiation fog occurs one or two days
after the cessation of rainfall. Normally the radiation occurs in the early morning and may
prevail till late forenoon. Along the coastal areas of Orissa, West Bengal. Bangladesh fog
generally occurs ahead of a WD which is located further to the west as moist air current is
drawn over these areas under the influence of the WD. Occasionally such conditions also
occur over Bihar and east Uttar Pradesh when a easterly stream in the lower levels extends
over these areas under the influence of WD.
In the Brahmaputra valley of Assam for formation is frequent more than 20 days a
month in winter season. The river and abundant vegetation in the valley provide plenty of
moisture in the lower level. The overlaying dry and cold westerly flow provides ideal
condition for the formation of fog in the area almost daily
In association with an active WD extensive fog occurs over plains of north India
during December to March.
3031.2.2 Middle and upper tropospheric westerly trough and sub tropical westerly jet
(STWJ)
The predominant winds in the mid latitude regions are westerly. However, the
streamlines are characterized by wave like motion with alternative troughs and ridges. These
waves were extensively studied by Rossby and are known as Rossby waves or planetary
waves. These waves generally move from west to east.
The mid latitude westerly troughs sometimes develop large amplitudes (i.e their N – S
extent is very large). Such trough extend southward to tropical regions from November to
May and indirectly affect the tropical weather. It has also been established that ahead of a
trough divergence occurs and helps intensification of systems on the surface/lower
tropospheric levels. The waves may be long waves having a wave length of more than 5000
kms. And short waves, having a wave length of 2000 to 3000 km.
Movements of the short wave troughs are faster than the long waves. Long waves are
generally of larger amplitude, while the short waves have smaller amplitude. The westerly
trough mainly affects weather over the Indian sub continent from October to May. During
the monsoon season these troughs are seen rarely in this region.
JET STREAM
According to WMO definition a Jet Stream is a narrow current concentrated along a
quasi horizontal axis in the upper troposphere characterized by strong vertical and lateral
wind shear featuring one or more velocity maxima. Normally a jet stream is thousands of
kilometer in length, hundreds of kilometer in width and a few kilometer in depth. The
vertical wind shear is of the order of 5 to 10 m/sec per km and the lateral shear is of the order
of 5 m/sec per 100 km.
An arbitrary lower limit of 30 m/sec (60 kt/hour) is assigned to the wind speed along
the axis of the jet stream.
Sub Tropical Westerly Jet (STWJ)
Jet stream in the subtropical latitude is a semipermanent feature (Namais and Clapp
1949). It is strongest near the 200 hPa level. During the colder season the subtropical jet
stream is a dominating phenomenon in both the hemispheres. The major wind maxima are
normally located downstream from the region of strongest confluence.
The STWJ is generally observed over North India from October to May and is
strongest during the winter. The main characteristics of the STWJ over India during winter
are
304(i) The mean position of the jet stream in winter lies near Lat. 26º N (Jodhpur,
Allahabad, Guwahati at 200 hPa level (12 km) The mean wind speed at the core is
about 100 kts. The axis of the Jet Stream shifts southward as the season advances and
towards the end of winter or in early spring it reaches the southernmost position.
(ii) There are two maxima: one over the western India (Jodhpur) and the other over the
eastern India (Guwahati)
(iii) The mean wind speed of 95 kts is recorded at 12 km, over Jodhpur and 10.5 km at
Guwahati. At 12 km it is 90 kts over Guwahati. The mean wind speed is 80 kts. Over
Allahabad both at 10.5 and 12.0 km
(iv) During winter the wind speeds of 60 kts or more are found to the north of Lat. 20º N.
At this latitude Jet speed wind is observed in a thin layer of the atmosphere. At Lat.
23º N the Jet wind commences at 9 km and over Assam even at 7 km and extends
upto 14 km.
(v) The horizontal wind shear is generally more than 5 km/hr per 100 km to the south of
the jet core and the vertical shear is about 20 km hour per km below the core
(vi) The S.T. jet stream lies entirely within the troposphere and about 3 – 4 km below the
tropopause and is located near the break in the tropopause between tropical (near 100
hPa) and middle latitude (near 200 – 250 hPa) tropopauses.
(vii) It is strongest in February along Delhi – Allahabad – Guwahati latitudes. It shifts in
May to 30 N and disappears from the Indian Latitude during the SW monsoon period.
It appears near 30º N in October at 12 km and shifts between 25º N and 30º N in
December. Mean wind speed is 70 kts in November and 80 kts in December.
1.2.3 Easterly waves
These are the waves/troughs in the equatorial easterly winds (Trades) having
an approximate wave length around 2000 km. These are weak waves and can be
detected in the wind field than in the pressure field. The easterly waves are not
typical of the whole tropical belt. They are observed in some parts of the tropical belt
(namely) north Atlantic and mid Pacific and in the Indian Seas during from November
to March and are prominent from the winter season. They can be traced in the Indian
Seas from the westward moving isallobaric centre at sea level and wind shift in the
upper air. These waves generally attain maximum intensity around 600 hPa. The
predominant periodicity of the easterly wave is 7 – 10 days, occasionally 4 -5 days.
The wave generally tilts eastward with height. There is lower level convergence and
upper level divergence on the east side (rear) of the surface / 0.3 km a.s.l wave. As
such, convective shower activity is generally greatest in the rear (east) of a wave
although it may occur with much lesser intensity and aerial extent to the west
(forward) of it. During winter south Tamil Nadu and south Kerala experience rainfall
due to the movement of easterly waves across south Peninsula.
305CHAPTER 2
PREMONSOON SEASON
Climatic pattern
It is transition period from winter circulation to summer monsoon circulation. The
month of April is taken as the representative month for the season. During this season
both days and nights are not, which is occasionally alleviated by local thundershowers.
Heat wave conditions over plains of north India and dust/sand storms over northwest
India & neighbourhood are the common features of the season.
2.1.1 Sea Level Pressure
It is a transition period from larger pressure gradient from northern latitudes towards
south (winter) to large pressure gradient from equatorial region towards north (monsoon).
Though the pressure gradient is weak during this season there is dramatic change from the
winter pattern. Due to increased heating of lands low pressure area starts developing over
the land in March itself. The isobars are tapering shaped over the Peninsular India due to
maritime influence. The land heating is more prominent to the north of 20º N. A weak
low pressure area develops over Singh and another over Bihar and adjacent U.P. there is
an extension of the heat low as a trough of low pressure up to Orissa, over the peninsular
India a trough forms with its axis along longitude 78º E Shallow highs develop over the
sea areas one over the Central Bay of Bengal and another over the central Arabian Sea.
By May the heat low is established over Punjab and adjoining areas with an extension of
trough up to Orissa
3062.1.2 Surface Winds:
The winds are Northwesterly to Northerly to the west of the trough line and southerly
to southeasterly to the east of it over the peninsula. In the northern plains of India winds
during April are light westerlies whereas over Assam they are light easterlies. Winds
over the Arabian Sea and the Bay of Bengal are light and are turning anti