Soil Fertility and Nutrient Management
Interpretation of Standard Soil Test
Soil Fertility and Nutrient
Results
Management
Soil pH (sometimes called active soil acidity) is based on the
pH scale, which measures the acidic or basic reaction of the
Reviewed by Liz Maynard and Ajay Nair – Aug 2021
soil. A pH less than 7 is acidic; a pH greater than 7 is
alkaline. When soil pH is too low
Soil tests aid vegetable growers with their soil fertility and
fertilizer application programs. Soil tests are most useful
for good crop growth, adding lime will raise the pH. Natural
when growers keep accurate records for each field that
processes and agricultural practices tend to lower pH over
include the amount of fertilizers and other soil amendments
time, so it is important to measure it every year or two. When
they applied, crop yields, and rotations. These records allow
soils are alkaline, the testing laboratory may recommend
growers to determine trends in soil fertility and crop response
applying sulfur (S) to lower the pH to a level that allows
to applied fertilizers over several years.
nutrient availability in the soil.
Efficient vegetable production relies on growers adjusting
Lime index (sometimes called “buffer pH”) measures reserve
lime and fertilizer applications to their soils’ existing pH and
soil acidity. The lime index is used to make limestone
fertility levels. Growers can increase their net returns if they
recommendations. It usually takes lime four to six months to
maintain proper soil fertility, which can reduce crop losses
correct soil acidity. Your land-grant university or extension
from physiological disorders. Applying nutrients based on
service can provide you with liming recommendations
crop needs and existing soil nutrient levels also reduces the
specific your state.
movement of nutrients into groundwater and surface waters.
Phosphorus may be reported as P (phosphorus) or P O
Take soil samples at the same time each year, preferably in 2 5
(phosphate). The units for P and other nutrient values may be
the fall or early spring. Soil pH varies seasonally, so
given as parts per million (ppm) or pounds per acre. The
comparing winter and summer samples is difficult. A typical
value is an estimate of the amount of phosophorus in the soil
soil test for plants usually determines pH, lime index (also
that the plant can use for growth. Applying P O fertilizer at
called buffer pH), available Bray P1 phosphorus (P), 2 5
100 pounds per acre will increase the soil P test level by
exchangeable potassium (K), calcium (Ca), magnesium (Mg),
about 10 pounds per acre.
and cation exchange capacity. It also includes the percent
base saturation of Ca, Mg, and K.
Potassium may be reported as K (potassium) or K O
2
(potash). The test value estimates the amount of K available
In addition to the routine pH test, growers should test soils
per acre. About 50 percent of the potassium applied in
that are susceptible to large variations in soil pH for salt pH.
fertilizers is fixed in the soil and is not immediately available
The salt pH provides a more accurate estimate of the true
to plants — this can vary by soil type and clay content. Soil K
acidity in these soil types by simulating the effects of
declines due crop removal,leaching, and soil erosion.
fertilizer salts on soil pH.
Calcium (Ca) and magnesium (Mg) soil test values
There are also tests to determine organic matter and other
represent the amount of Ca and Mg available in the soil. Ca
nutrients, including sulfur (S), manganese (Mn), boron (B),
and Mg values generally are low when soils are acidic.
and zinc (Zn). Some labs test for microbial activity and
Levels are usually sufficient when pH and the lime test index
water-soluble carbon, which can predict the release of
are at proper levels.
nitrogen and phosphorus from organic sources.
Cation exchange capacity (CEC) is a measure of the soil’s
ability to hold exchangeable cations such as hydrogen (H),
Your land-grant university or extension service can provide
Ca, Mg, K, sodium (Na), iron (Fe), and aluminum (Al). CEC
you with a list of soil testing labs in your area.
is measured in terms of milliequivalents (meq) per 100 grams
of soil. Soil type and soil organic matter determine CEC.
Soilless Growing Media
Clay-, silt- and loam-type soils generally have a higher CEC
than sandy soils because they have many more exchange sites
to hold cations. High-CEC soils generally hold nutrients
Test soilless growing media used in transplant or crop
better than low-CEC soils. High-CEC also lose smaller
production for pH and total soluble salts before using it.
amounts of nutrients due to leaching.
Request a test specifically for “soilless media” from the lab.
If the crop will be grown in soilless media more than a
month, regularly test the media or plant tissue to catch any
nutrient imbalances that may affect crop growth and yield.
14 Midwest Veg Guide 2022Soil Fertility and Nutrient Management
Here are the typical CEC ranges of various soil types: It is up to growers to figure how much fertilizer or product
they must apply to meet the suggested recommendations.
Soil Texture CEC Range This can be tricky, because growers may need more than one
Sands 5-15 kind of fertilizer product to meet the recommendations.
Silts 8-30
Clays 25-50
Fertilizer products are required to list the percent N, P O ,
Organic soils 50+ 2 5
and K O equivalent they contain — and the products are
2
listed in the order: N-P-K. For example, a fertilizer labeled
Base saturation is the percentage of the total CEC occupied
10-10-10 contains the equivalent of 10 percent N, 10 percent
by basic cations such as Ca, Mg, and K. Base saturation is
P O , and 10 percent K O. So a pound of this fertilizer would
related to soil pH and soil fertility. On acid soils, the percent 2 5 2
contain 0.1 pound each of N, P O , and K O. Urea labeled
base saturation of Ca and Mg is low. The saturation of the 2 5 2
46-0-0 contains 46 percent N, 0 percent P O , and 0 percent
different cations is important because plants take up some 2 5
K O. Potassium chloride (muriate of potash) labeled 0-0-60
cations more easily than others. The base saturation for Ca 2
contains 0 percent N, 0 percent P O , and 60 percent K O.
should be 60 percent or more; Mg should range between 10 2 5 2
Organic fertilizers are also labeled this way — a 3-2-2
and 15 percent; K should range from 1 to 5 percent. Excess
product contains 3 percent N, 2 percent P O , and 2 percent
levels of one cation can reduce the uptake of another. Some 2 5
K O. It is important to note that some of the N and P in
soil scientists believe that there should be specific Ca:Mg 2
organic fertilizers require warm, moist soil and microbial
ratios and Mg:K ratios (2:1). Most horticulturists believe that
activity before it is available to plants.
if base saturation levels are at the minimum levels suggested
here, then it is not important to maintain specific proportions
Let’s say a nutrient recommendation calls for 100 pounds of
or ratios.
N and 100 pounds of K O per acre.
2
Crop Nutrient Requirements
A grower could meet that recommendation by using 217
pounds of urea (217 pounds of urea X 0.46 N = 100
Vegetable crops require 17 essential elements (nutrients) for
pounds of N) and 167 pounds of potassium chloride (167
development and reproduction. In addition to carbon (C),
pounds of potassium chloride X 0.60 K O = 100 pounds of
hydrogen (H), and oxygen (O), plants need macronutrients in 2
K O).
large concentrations and micronutrients in relatively small 2
concentrations.
A grower could also meet that recommendation by using
1,000 pounds of premixed 10-10-10 fertilizer (1,000 pounds
Each crop has a crop nutrient requirement (CNR) for
of fertilizer X 0.10 N = 100 pounds of N; 1,000 pounds of
particular nutrients. The CNR is defined as the total amount
fertilizer X 0.10 K O = 100 pounds of K O).
of the nutrient (in pounds per acre) the crop requires to 2 2
produce optimum economic yield. The concept of optimum
But that same fertilizer would also supply 100 pounds of
economic yield is important in vegetable production, because
P O that is not needed. So, using such a fertilizer could be a
2 5
applying a certain amount of a nutrient might produce a lot of
waste of money and could pollute surface or ground water.
biomass, but may produce negligible marketable product due
to small fruit size, small number of fruits, or large number of
If you choose a premixed fertilizer, select the ratio of
culls and small number of marketable fruits. Always consider
nutrients that comes closest to the amount of recommended
fruit number, size, and quality in the CNR concept for
nutrients. It is not necessary to be exact as long as any
vegetable production.
differences are reasonable. If you can’t get to the
recommended nutrient application using premixed fertilizers,
The best way to achieve the CNR is to begin with a soil test.
it is fine to first make a base application using a standard
The results from a soil lab analysis include recommendations
fertilizer ratio, and then apply individual elements to reach
for the amount of lime or sulfur needed to balance the soil
the recommended nutrient levels.
pH, and indicate the amount of fertilizer needed to deliver the
CNR.
For example, you can supply extra N with urea or urea
ammonium nitrate (UAN) solution; you can supply extra K
Macronutrients with muriate of potash. Custom-blended fertilizers can be
made to almost any desired ratio.
Nitrogen (N), phosphorus (P), and potassium (K) are the Nitrogen (N)
primary macronutrients, and they are commonly applied in
fertilizers for field vegetable production. Plant nutrient Standard soil tests aren’t very useful for predicting how much
recommendations are often given as pounds of N, pounds of N fertilizer you need to apply to optimize yield and qualilty.
phosphate (P O ) and pounds of potash (K O) per acre. N fertilizer recommendations account for the soil type,
2 5 2
amount of organic matter in the soil, field history, and crop.
The recommendations in this guide are based on data from
Midwest Veg Guide 2022 15Soil Fertility and Nutrient Management
relevant field trials. Adjust these recommendations according form of lime solves most Ca and Mg deficiency problems
to experience, soil type, cropping history, additions of (see Soil pH and Adjustment). When Ca is deficient and there
organic matter, and crop culture system. is no need to increase soil pH, you may use gypsum (calcium
sulfate) as a source of Ca. Similarly, you can add Mg without
For example, suppose your vegetable crop is following affecting pH by using Epsom salts (magnesium sulfate, 10
soybeans, alfalfa, or a grass-legume hay crop. If your soils percent Mg), sul-po-mag (11 percent Mg), or finely ground
have more than 3 percent organic matter, you may not need to magnesium oxide (e.g., MAGOX, 58 percent Mg).
add any sidedressed N. If your soils that have less than 3
percent organic matter, then half the total N can be applied If a soil test shows low Mg (less than 50 ppm in Minnesota or
preplant and the other half sidedressed early in the crop less than 40 ppm in other states), apply Mg at 100 pounds per
growth cycle. acre broadcast or 20 pounds per acre in the row.
Now suppose your vegetable crop is following corn, rye, oats, If a soil test shows medium Mg (51-100 ppm in Minnesota or
wheat, or a previous vegetable crop. There may be no 40-69 ppm in other states) apply Mg at 50 pounds per acre
residual soil N available, so the crop may benefit from broadcast or 10 pounds per acre in the row.
additional sidedress N. It may be useful to test the soil for
nitrate-N shortly before sidedressing to assess whether the If a soil test shows high Mg, no application is necessary.
crop will benefit from the application.
You can make foliar sprays of Epsom salts at the rate of 10 to
Phosphorus (P) 15 pounds in a least 30 gallons per acre to temporarily solve
Mg deficiencies during the growing season.
P recommendations for vegetables are based on the soil test
value, the type of crop, and estimates of crop removal. On
If a soil test indicates a need for sulfur, materials such as
mineral soils, most vegetables will benefit from P fertilization
gypsum (calcium sulfate), Epsom salts (magnesium sulfate),
if the soil test is less than 35-40 ppm P using the Bray-Kurtz
ammonium sulfate, potassium sulfate, or potassium-
P1 extraction method.
magnesium sulfate can be used. Make sure to account for the
nutrients in addition to sulfur that these materials supply.
If the soil test on a mineral soil is more than 80 ppm P, then
no additional P is recommended for most vegetables. P does
Micronutrients
not move readily in the soil and applied P easily reacts with
soil minerals so that it is unavailable to the plant. That’s why
P fertilizer is applied in bands near the crop when possible,
Micronutrients include boron (B), chlorine (Cl), copper (Cu),
and starter solutions that are high in P are recommended for
iron (Fe), manganese (Mn), molybdenum (Mo), nickel (Ni),
transplants.
and zinc (Zn). Of these nutrients, those most likely to be
lacking in Midwest soils used for vegetable production are B
Potassium (K)
and Mn. Zn may also be a concern in some areas.
K recommendations for vegetables are based on the soil test
Manganese (Mn)
value, the soil CEC, the type of crop, and estimates of crop
removal.
Mn deficiency is common in some areas. Mn deficiency
occurs primarily on lakebed and fine-textured, dark- colored
Vegetables usually benefit from K fertilization if the soil test
soils with high pH. Cool, wet conditions tend to intensify Mn
is:
deficiency. Beans, beets, onions, spinach, and tomatoes have
• Less than 85 ppm K in soil with low CEC (4 meq/100 g). high requirements, but deficiencies also are reported for
cucumbers, peppers, and turnips.
• Less than 115 ppm K in soil with medium CEC (16
meq/100 g).
Apply manganese sulfate at 2 to 4 pounds per 100 gallons per
The maximum annual K recommendation for most vegetables acre to eliminate deficiency problems observed during the
is 300 pounds of K 2 O per acre. K fertilization is not usually growing season. Fungicides containing Mn can also help
recommended if the soil test is more than 135 ppm K on a correct deficiencies.
soil with low CEC, or more than 165 ppm K on a soil with
medium CEC. Boron (B)
Calcium (Ca), Magnesium (Mg), Sulfur B leaches readily, so responsive crops often need annual
applications on sandy loam, loamy sand, sandy, and muck
(S)
soils. Deficiency symptoms include browning on cauliflower
heads, cracked stems on celery, blackheart on beet, and
Calcium (Ca), Magnesium (Mg) and Sulfur (S) are
internal browning on turnip.
considered secondary macronutrients because plants require
them in smaller amounts than N, P, and K. Ca and Mg
usually are deficient in acid soils. Adding the appropriate
16 Midwest Veg Guide 2022Soil Fertility and Nutrient Management
Broccoli, cauliflower, celery, beet, turnip, and rutabaga are Animal Manures and Composts
likely to respond to B applications of 3 to 4 pounds per acre
when soil levels are low. Cabbage, carrot, lettuce, parsnip, as Fertilizers
radish, spinach, and tomato show a medium response and
usually benefit from 1 to 2 pounds of B per acre.
Animal manures and composts can provide significant
Bean, peas, and cucumber are sensitive to B, so do not apply nutrients to plants. The nutrient content of manures varies
it to these crops. among animal species and within each species. Nutrients in
composts can vary even more and depend on parent material
You can add B to the soil with Borax (which contains 10.6 and processing. Test manures and composts to determine the
percent B) or Solubor (which contains 20.5 percent B). B potential nutrient contributions and plan application rates
applications are most effective if applied with the fertilizer at based on their nutrient content. Avoid using composts of
preplant or at the time of transplanting. unknown origin or parent material. Improperly made
composts, be they of rural or urban origin, can contain heavy
Mid- or late season foliar applications are not as effective as metals, inorganic debris, diseases, and insects that are
early granular or foliar applications. It is important not to unwelcome on your fields.
exceed recommended B rates to avoid toxicity in subsequent
B-sensitive crops. Carryover is most likely after a dry fall and It is important to consider the timing of manure and compost
winter. applications. Fresh manure has potential to “burn” a crop
because it often contains high levels of ammonia, and fresh or
Other micronutrient deficiencies are rare in field-grown casually “aged” manure often contains human pathogens. For
vegetable crops in this region. these reasons, it is rarely acceptable to apply fresh or “aged”
manure to food crops while they are growing. Generally, a
fall application is acceptable, ideally to a cover crop, and at
Fertilizer and the Environment
least nine months before harvesting the next vegetable crop.
Any use of manure or composts should follow current Good
Nitrogen from both natural (manure, compost, green manure)
Agricultural Practices (GAPs), and mandates of the Food
and synthetic sources can be lost from fields, which can
Safety Modernization Act (FSMA). The demands of a
pollute water and increase greenhouse gasses that contribute
to climate change. Similarly, natural and synthetic sources of
particular market may be more stringent. For guidanc e about
GAPS and FSMA, see Produce Food Safety section.
P can move out of cropped areas and pollute waterways. With
proper fertilizer management, vegetable producers can
minimize environmental impacts and improve fertilizer use Fertilizer Application Methods
efficiency. Growers should know their crops, account for the
nutrient values of all soil amendments, and test soils and
plants to support their fertilizer decisions. Fertilizer application timing and methods vary from farm-to-
farm depending on cultural practices and equipment. This
Split N applications — applying some N before planting and section outlines common practices of efficient fertilizer
sidedressing the rest during the season — are generally more placement and utilization. These practices can be modified to
efficient than complete preplant applications. However, split suit particular situations.
applications require growers to pay attention to crop growth
and sidedress at the appropriate times: before crops are Usually, growers can apply at preplant and disk into the soil
stressed, and early enough to allow crops to mature. 50-60 percent of the recommended N and all of the P and K
fertilizer. This is especially true when the rates of a complete
Banding P at planting (with or without some P being fertilizer will require more than 400 pounds per acre.
broadcast/incorporated) is generally more efficient than
broadcasting all P. Sidedressing P is not recommended We recommend band application for many direct-seeded
because it is not mobile in soils. vegetable crops. This technique applies a concentrated line of
fertilizer 2 inches to the side and 2 inches below the seed
Generally, K and the minor elements do not contribute furrow. This is an efficient way to apply fertilizer, and much
significantly to groundwater pollution, but growers should of the P and K fertilizer can be applied this way. However, do
manage them properly to minimize costs and maximize not make banded fertilizer applications exceeding 80 pounds
efficiency. per acre of N plus K — this can injure seed.
Minimizing soil erosion, timing irrigation properly, and For crops grown on plastic mulch (with or without a raised
avoiding excess irrigation will also improve fertilizer use bed) growers may apply fertilizer just to the bed area. As with
efficiency and reduce losses from the field. broadcast applications, growers can apply a portion of the
recommended N, and all of the P and K before planting. If N
will be supplied through fertigation during the season, apply
Midwest Veg Guide 2022 17Soil Fertility and Nutrient Management
only 20 to 50 percent of the total N before planting. Apply Rate per Linear Bed Foot for Various
the remaining N with regular drip irrigation at 5 to 10 pounds
Bed Spacings and Rates
of N per week until the total recommended for the season has
been applied. K may also be applied through drip irrigation if
Bed Linear Bed Fertilizer Rate (lbs./A)
the crop needs more than has been applied to the soil before
Spacing Feet (LBF) 20 40 60 80 100 120
planting.
(ft) in 1 Acre Fertilizer Rate (lb./LBF)
3 14,520 0.0014 0.0028 0.0041 0.0055 0.0069 0.0083
If you apply only part of the recommended N before planting, 4 10,890 0.0018 0.0037 0.0055 0.0073 0.0092 0.011
apply the remainder as a sidedressing when the plants are still 5 8,712 0.0023 0.0046 0.0069 0.0092 0.0115 0.0138
6 7,260 0.0028 0.0055 0.0083 0.011 0.0138 0.0165
young, or apply N through fertigation before and during the
7 6,222 0.0032 0.0064 0.0096 0.0129 0.0161 0.0193
period of rapid crop growth. Early sidedress applications are
8 5,445 0.0037 0.0073 0.011 0.0147 0.0184 0.022
especially important with crops such as sweet corn, broccoli, 9 4,840 0.0041 0.0083 0.0124 0.0165 0.0207 0.0248
and cabbage. The total N applied during the growing season 10 4,356 0.0046 0.0092 0.0138 0.0184 0.023 0.0275
(broadcast, plus banded, plus transplant starter, plus
sidedressed, plus fertigated) should equal the recommended
Soil pH and Adjustment
N rate. Applying more than the recommended rate of N may
be necessary when there are leaching rains.
Soil pH describes whether the soil solution is acidic or
Transplanted crops often respond to a small amount of water- alkaline. The native pH of Midwest soils varies from quite
soluble fertilizer in the transplanting water. Special fertilizer acidic (pH 5.0 or lower) to quite alkaline (pH 7.5 or higher).
grades (such as 14-28-14, 10-52-10, 23-21-17) are used at a Most vegetable crops prefer a pH range of 6.0-6.8 on mineral
rate of 3 pounds per 50 gallons of water. The high-P liquid soils. On muck soils, a pH of 5.5-5.8 is considered adequate.
10-34-0 can also be used at the rate of 2 quarts per 50 gallons Vegetables grown under acid soil conditions lack vigor and
of water. Apply starter solutions at 8 ounces per plant. If dry yield poorly. Acid soils restrict the uptake of nutrients such as
weather is prevalent, irrigate after setting the plants. P and K. Acid soils also make elements such as aluminum
(Al) and manganese (Mn) more available to plants so that the
Fertilizer Rates per Linear Bed Foot plant may absorb enough to be toxic to the plant. Under
severe conditions, visible foliage injury can result from
magnesium (Mg) deficiency and/or Mn toxicity.
You can apply fertilizer in a band while shaping beds or Physiological disorders such as blossom end rot are more
laying plastic. You can also apply it dissolved through common on acid soils. In contrast, when soil pH is high, Mn,
irrigation water and delivered by drip tape to the base of the B, iron (Fe), and certain other micronutrients become less
plants. In these systems, it is helpful to calculate the fertilizer available for plant uptake. Deficiencies of these
rate per linear bed foot (LBF) based on the fertilizer rate per micronutrients are most likely to occur on mineral soils with
acre. To do so, you will need to know: pH greater than 7.4.
• Bed spacing (BS): distance in feet between bed centers
Lime neutralizes soil acidity and supplies Ca and Mg,
• Fertilizer rate in lb./A (RatePerA)
elements necessary for plant growth. A soil test determines
Use this equation to determine the fertilizer rate in pounds per how much lime you need. Liming may be necessary every
LBF: few years because soil pH tends to decline over time. The
decline is caused by ammonium-releasing N fertilizers, the
(RatePerA X BS) / 43,560 = RatePerLBF crop’s removal of Ca, and the leaching of Ca and Mg by rain.
Example:
Soil pH and Plant Nutrients
Bed spacing (BS) = 5 ft. between centers of beds
Fertilizer rate in lb./A (RatePerA) = 100 lbs./A Nitrogen (N)
(100 X 5) / 43,560 = 0.0115 lb./LBF Plants can take up N in the form of ammonium (NH 4 +) or
nitrate (NO
3
-). In the soil, ammonium is converted into
For a crop on six 100-foot beds, there would 600 LBF to nitrate, and vice versa, by particular sets of microbes. When
fertilize. The amount of fertilizer needed to supply 100 lbs./A soil pH is near neutral (pH 7), and the soil is moist and warm,
would be: the microbial conversion of ammonium to nitrate
(nitrification) is rapid, and crops generally take up nitrate. In
600 LBF X 0.0115 lb./LBF= 6.9 lbs. acid soils (pH lower than 6), nitrification is slow, and plants
will take up a higher percentage of N as ammonium.
The Rate per Linear Bed Foot for Various Bed Spacings and
Rates table provides conversion of lb./A to lb./LBF for a Soil pH also plays an important role in N loss due to
number of bed spacings and fertilizer rates. volatilization. Volatilization occurs when N compounds turn
18 Midwest Veg Guide 2022Soil Fertility and Nutrient Management
to gaseous forms (ammonia, nitrous oxides, N gas) and Sulfur (S)
evaporate into the air. Ammonium in the soil solution exists
Plants absorb sulfur as sulfate (SO 2-). Sulfate is little affected
in equilibrium with ammonia gas (NH ). The amount of each 3
3 4
by soil pH.
compound depends to a large extent on the soil pH. At lower
pH, there is more ammonium and less ammonia gas. At pH 7, Micronutrients
the equilibrium condition is 99 percent ammonium and 1
percent ammonia. At pH 8, the equilibrium is about 90 Micronutrients are elements plants need in very small
amounts. The availability of the micronutrients Mn, Fe,
percent ammonium and 10 percent ammonia gas.
copper (Cu), Zn, and B, decreases as soil pH increases. The
exact mechanisms responsible for reducing availability differ
Volatilization from N fertilizers that contribute ammonium to
for each nutrient. Deficiencies of these micronutrients are
the soil (such as urea) is likely to be high at higher soil pH
more likely at high pH, and toxicities are more likely at low
levels. However, depending on soil temperature and moisture,
pH.
volatilization can be significant at lower soil pH levels, too,
especially if the soil is dry and the fertilizer is not
The availability of the micronutrient molybdenum (Mo) is
incorporated. To minimize volatilization, apply N in just the
reduced under acid conditions. Mo deficiency is more likely
quantities plants need during the growing season, incorporate
to occur in acid soils.
it into the soil, and use slow-release sources when possible.
Soil pH is also an important factor in the N nutrition of Types of Lime
legumes. Plants in this family are able to fix N from the soil
with the help of several genera of soil bacteria known
Several types of lime that may be used to manage soil pH
collectively as Rhizobia. As soils become more acidic,
and/or Ca and Mg are described below. After each
Rhizobia decline in activity, fixing less N.
discussion, the percentage of CaO and MgO in a typical batch
Phosphorus (P) of lime is given.
Plants absorb P from the soil solution in the form of soluble Calcitic lime (also called high-calcium lime — 50-56% CaO,
phosphates. At any time, the amount of P in solution is 1-4% MgO) is the most soluble form and is the preferred type
usually extremely low — often less than 1 pound per acre — when soil Ca is low and soil Mg is high. It generally reacts
because P joins with other elements in the soil to form stable the fastest and is the most common form available in some
minerals. areas.
The type of mineral that gets formed in the soil depends on Magnesian lime (also called hi-mag lime — 32-42% CaO, 5-
the soil’s pH. In alkaline soils, P in fertilizers such as mono- 15% MgO) is intermediate in solubility and is the preferred
ammonium phosphate (11-55-0) usually react with Ca to type when pH, Ca, and Mg are low. The continued use of
form calcium phosphate minerals. The P in calcium high-Mg liming materials increases the base saturation of Mg
phosphate minerals is not available to plants, but as plants and decreases Ca saturation, which may result in Ca
remove P from the soil solution, the minerals gradually deficiencies during stress periods.
dissolve to replenish the supply of P in the soil solution.
Greenhouse and field research has shown that more than 90 Dolomitic lime (30% CaO, 20% MgO) is the preferred type
percent of the fertilizer P tied up this year in calcium when Mg is particularly low. Dolomitic lime is the least
phosphate minerals will be available to crops in future years. soluble of the materials.
In acid soils, P usually reacts with Al and Fe, instead of Ca. Hydrated lime (60% CaO, 12% MgO) reacts most rapidly
Aluminum and iron phosphates do not dissolve as readily as with the soil, but unlike the ground limestones described
calcium phosphates, so in acid soils, applied P tends to be above, it does not continue to provide liming activity over a
tied up more than in alkaline soils. period of years. Hydrated lime is caustic to humans and
plants, and applicators must take care not to burn plants. Use
Potassium (K) hydrated lime only in emergencies when rapid changes in soil
pH are needed.
In soils with certain types of clay, K is fixed at specific sites
between clay layers. This tends to be reduced under acid
Gypsum is not a liming material and does not affect soil pH.
conditions, presumably because Al occupies the binding sites
It is a crude calcium sulfate product consisting chiefly of
that would otherwise trap K. Because of this, one might think
calcium sulfate with combined water (CaSO 2H O).
4 2
that raising the pH by liming would reduce the availability of
Although gypsum is not capable of neutralizing soil acidity, it
K. However, this is not the case — at least in the short term.
is a source of calcium and sulfur.
Liming increases K availability, probably because Ca
displaces K on exchange sites.
Fluid lime is a suspension of finely ground limestone in
water, and may contain other dispersing agents. Finely
Midwest Veg Guide 2022 19Soil Fertility and Nutrient Management
ground limestone reacts with soil more quickly than normal
limestone. In fluid lime, 100 percent of the liming material Concentrations of nutrients in plant tissue that are normal,
must pass through a 100-mesh screen, and nearly 80 to 90 deficient, or excessive have been identified for most
percent must pass through an even smaller 200-mesh screen. vegetables. The concentrations depend on the plant part and
The principles of effectiveness of ground agricultural lime stage of growth. Before collecting plant tissue, contact a
also apply to fine or fluid lime. Lime suspensions do not tissue testing lab and request instructions for collecting and
possess any special capabilities compared with conventional submitting samples. The specific plant part to collect for
agricultural lime that contains a high degree of 60-mesh or tissue analysis varies depending on the crop; often it is a
finer particles. recently mature leaf. The stage of crop growth is important
because normal tissue nutrient concentrations change as the
Pelletized lime, or pell-lime, is finely ground lime that has crop develops.
been formed into pellets for easy application. Because it is
finely ground, it will react quickly in the soil. Unlike regular If the tissue test is being used to diagnose a specific
ag lime, it will not provide residual liming activity over a few symptom, collect separate samples from each of these groups:
years.
• Symptomatic plants
• Healthy plants
Liming Recommendations
• Plants with minor symptoms
Comparing the results of these three samples, along with
Fields usually require lime every few years because Ca and results of soil tests, can help in determining the problem. For
Mg are removed in harvested portions of the crop, leached assistance in interpreting plant tissue tests, contact your
out of surface soil by rainfall, and lost from the field when local extension vegetable specialist.
soil erodes. Lime is also needed to neutralize acidity
produced by acid-forming fertilizers.
Chemigation Management
Growers sometimes need to add lime to correct subsoil
acidity. In that case, apply enough lime to bring the surface
Chemigation is the process of applying an agricultural
soil to pH 6.8. The subsoil pH will increase only if you
chemical (pesticide or fertilizer) to the soil or plant surface
maintain the surface pH near 6.5 or more. Over time, rain
through an irrigation system. Depending on the type of
will leach the Ca and Mg into the subsoil, raising its pH.
agricultural chemical, chemigation may be referred to as
Because this downward movement takes several years, the
fertigation, insectigation, fungigation, etc.
sooner the lime is applied, the better.
For chemigation applications, you can only use pesticides
In most cases, make split applications when the
that display EPA approval for such applications on the
recommendation is more than 4 tons per acre. This will
label. Each chemigation and irrigation system also must use
achieve a more thorough mixing with the acidic soil.
the safety equipment specified on the EPA label as well as
any equipment required in your state. Some states also may
Apply half the lime before plowing and half before soil
require a system or operator permit before you can apply
fitting. For best results, apply the lime at least six months
any product with chemigation.
before seeding a legume.
Chemigation can be an effective application option for some
If you have a recommendation for a maintenance application
labeled pesticides if the irrigation system can apply the
of 2 tons per acre or less, you can apply it at any time in the
chemical/water solution uniformly over the target area with
cropping sequence.
the correct water depth. Some pesticides work best with less
than 0.25 inch of water per application.
Plant Tissue Analysis
Most late-model center pivot and linear move systems
provide adequate distribution but some may not be able to
Plant tissue analysis for nutrients is a useful tool in managing apply a small enough volume of water. Solid set sprinkler
plant health, and a tissue test is usually required to confirm a systems may be effective for some pesticides but require
diagnosis of nutrient deficiency. Tissue testing can be close timing of chemical movements to get complete and
especially helpful when growing a new crop or a familiar uniform coverage of the field. Drip irrigation can be used
crop in a new production system. effectively to apply certain pesticides and fertilizers.
Traveling gun and hand move systems do not provide water
Regular tissue tests, especially early in the growing season, distribution that has high uniformity and are not
will provide early notice of nutrient imbalances so they can recommended. Product labels provide more information
be corrected before yield or quality is affected. With high about appropriate water application amounts and which
value greenhouse crops regular tissue testing is often a irrigation systems are recommended.
standard part of production.
20 Midwest Veg Guide 2022Soil Fertility and Nutrient Management
If you do not have or maintain proper check valves and which should be terminated before it is 18 inches tall if it will
interlocks, the injected chemicals could backflow into the be incorporated into the soil.
water source. EPA and many state regulations specify that
each system must contain a reduced pressure zone (RPZ) The overwintering capacity of any cover crop is dependent on
backflow prevention valve, or one or two independent check prevailing winter temperatures and conditions. Depending on
valves with low-pressure drains and vacuum relief valves, winter weather, a cover crop may overwinter in one region
between the irrigation water source and the point of chemical and winterkill in another. Field peas and crimson clover
injection. Also, most regulations require a power interlock generally winter kill, but sometimes they do not and must be
between the irrigation pump and the chemical injector unit, a terminated in the spring.
low pressure shut down switch and a check valve on the
chemical injection hose. For specific requirements, check Different cover crops frequently require different soil
with the appropriate local or state agency. conditions for optimum growth. For example, alfalfa does
best on well-drained soils, while Ladino clover grows on
It is important to accurately calibrate the irrigation system poorly drained soils. Some crops, such as cereal rye, have
and pesticide application rate. The chemigation operator must fibrous root systems, whereas others, such as sweet clover,
be aware of the irrigation system’s application speed (acres have large. Whenever it is possible to use a mixture of these
per hour) for the chosen water application amount and the crops, the combination results in more organic matter to plow
concentration of chemical solution to determine the rate of under.
chemical injection.
Cover Crops for Vegetable Farms
More information about the special equipment, operations,
and calibration in overhead irrigation systems is available
from the University of Minnesota Extension Service This table describes some characteristics of cover crops that
resources, Chemigation Safety Measures, and, Applying may be used for vegetable crops. For more information about
Nitrogen with Irrigation Water, available at cover crops, visit the Midwest Cover Crops Council website,
extension.umn.edu. mccc.msu.edu, or refer to the SARE resource, Managing
Cover Crops Profitably, at sare.org/resources/managing-
cover-crops-profitably-3rd-edition.
Organic Matter and Cover
Crops Cover Crop Pounds/ Quantity of Seed Desirable
Bushel per Acre (pounds) Seeding Dates
Nonlegumes
90-120 (alone)
Organic matter affects plant growth and frequently is referred Rye 60 Sept. 1-Nov. 10
90 (mixture)
to as the “glue” that holds soil particles together. Perennial or
15-20 (alone)
common 24 Aug. 1-Sept. 15
5-8 (mixture)
ryegrass
It also promotes the development of soil aggregates, thus
Sudangrass 40 20-30 May 15-July 1
improving drainage, soil tilth, and soil structure. In sandy and
Field corn 56 50-60 May 15-July 1
sandy loam soils, organic matter improves water- holding
2-3 weeks before
Winter barley 48 80-100
capacity. fly-safe date
Hessian fly-safe
Wheat 60 90-120
date
You can add organic matter to the soil by various methods
Legumes
using green manure crops, cover crops, crop residues, animal
16-20 (alone) March 1-April 15
manures, mulches, and composts. Green manure crops Sweet clover 60 10-12 (mixture) July 15-Aug. 20
include sweet clover, alfalfa, thickly sown field corn, and Red clover 60 10-15 (alone) Feb. 1-April 1
summer seedings of soybean. These crops generally are Soybean 60 90-100 May 15-July 1
Alfalfa 60 12-18 March-April
plowed under before they are mature. At this stage, the plants
Hairy vetch 60 15-20 (mixture) Sept. 1-Nov. 1
usually contain the greatest amount of N and other nutrients,
Mixtures
plus an adequate amount of moisture for rapid decay. Rye/
90/15-20 Sept. 1-Oct. 1
However, green manure crops also can be plowed under in hairy vetch
the mature dry stage. At that stage, they do not decompose as Ryegrass/ 5-8
July 15-Aug. 20
sweet clover 12-15
readily and additional N may be needed to aid decomposition.
Sweet clover/
6-8 March 1-April 15
orchardgrass
Typically, growers plant cover crops after harvest to protect
the soil against erosion and terminate the cover crops the
following spring. Depending on the cover crop, termination is
accomplished through natural winter-kill, tillage, herbicide,
roller-crimping, or tarping, Additional N may be needed to
hasten the decomposition of the cover crop and avoid tie-up
of soil nitrogen. This is especially important with winter rye,
Midwest Veg Guide 2022 21Soil Fertility and Nutrient Management
Examples of Integrating Cover Crops Year 3
March: Leave winter-killed buckwheat
April-August: Carrot production
Cover crops help add organic matter, manage soilborne August-November: Crimson clover as a cover crop
diseases, and avoid soil erosion. Below are examples of five,
four-year cropping sequences that you can use with vegetable Year 4
crops. Each cover crop rotation sequence is designed to take March-May: If crimson clover does not winter kill, terminate
advantage of legumes for N-fixation, grass or buckwheat to by tillage or herbicide
suppress weeds, and brassica cover crops for bio-fumigation May-September: Sweet corn production
and reducing soil compaction. These rotations won't work on September-November: Cereal rye and hairy vetch as cover
every farm. Growers should try likely rotations in crops
manageable areas to develop the best strategy for their farms.
Year 5
Example 1
Return to Year 1
Year 0
Example 3
Fall before Year 1: Plant oats and peas as cover crops
Year 0
Year 1 Fall before Year 1: Oilseed radish as cover crop
March: If field peas do not winter kill, terminate by mowing,
tillage, or herbicide Year 1
April-August: Onion production March: Leave winter-killed oilseed radish
August-November: Crimson clover as a cover crop April-June: Lettuce production
July-August: Buckwheat as cover crop
Year 2 August-November: Cauliflower production
March: If crimson clover does not winter kill, terminate by November-June of Year 2: Cereal rye as a cover crop
tillage or herbicide
April-August: Potato production Year 2
August-November: Sorghum-sudangrass as a cover crop March-June: Terminate cereal rye cover crop
June-October: Eggplant or pepper production
Year 3 October-May of Year 3: Triticale as cover crop
March-May: Leave winter-killed sorghum-sudangrass
May-October: Sweet potato production Year 3
October-June of Year 4: Cereal rye as a cover crop March-May: Terminate triticale
May-September: Onion production
Year 4 September-November: Oats and field peas as cover crops
April-May: Terminate cereal rye by tillage, herbicide, or
roller-crimping Year 4
June-September: Cucumber production March-May: Leave winter-killed oats; terminate field peas if
September-November: Oats and field peas as a cover crop not winter-killed
May-September: Cucumber production
Year 5 September-November: Oilseed radish as cover crop
Return to Year 1
Year 5
Example 2
Return to Year 1
Year 0
Example 4
Fall before Year 1: Cereal rye and hairy vetch as cover crops
Year 0
Year 1 Fall before Year 1: Cowpea as cover crop
March-June: Terminate cereal rye and hairy vetch, leave
residue on surface Year 1
June-October: Pumpkin production March-May: Leave winter-killed cowpea
November-May of Year 2: Cereal rye as a cover crop May-August: Sweet corn production
August-October: Buckwheat as cover crop
Year 2 October-August of Year 2: Garlic production
March-May: Terminate cereal rye as cover crop
May-September: Tomato production Year 2
September-November: Buckwheat as a cover crop March-August: Leave garlic
August-November: Sorghum-sudangrass as cover crop
22 Midwest Veg Guide 2022Transplant Production
Year 3 Most growers use polyethylene-covered greenhouse
March-June: Leave winter-killed sorghum-sudangrass structures to provide warmth and protection from the
June-November: Pumpkin or winter squash production environment. Although cole crops do not need the more
November-April of Year 4: Cereal rye as cover crop moderating conditions a greenhouse provides, they can be
grown in coldframes, lean-tos, or covered wagon beds.
Year 4
March: Terminate cereal rye cover crop The heater is one of the most critical features of a transplant
April-August: Potato production ghouse. Vegetable transplants must be kept at the appropriate
August-October: Cowpea as cover crop temperatures. However, if heaters are improperly exhausted,
the transplants can be stunted or deformed. To prevent heater
Year 5 fumes from returning into the greenhouse, chimneys should
Return to Year 1 extend two feet above the ridge of the greenhouse.
Example 5 There should be some provision for bringing fresh air into the
greenhouse. Some heaters vent fresh air into the greenhouse
Year 0
every time the furnace operates. For others, a hole or holes
Fall before Year 1: Yellow mustard as cover crop
should be cut in the greenhouse wall and fitted with tubes to
feed outside air to the heater. Avoid space heaters that may
Year 1
“spit” diesel or gasoline onto nearby plants. Heated air should
March-May: Leave winter-killed mustard
be circulated using a perforated “sock” or tube that runs the
May-September: Cantaloupe production
length of the greenhouse, or fans placed on opposite sides of
September-June of Year 2: Cereal rye and hairy vetch as
the greenhouse and blowing in opposite directions. Place
cover crops
thermometers in several locations to measure the temperature
at plant level. At least one high-low thermometer is a good
Year 2
investment.
March-June: Terminate cereal rye and hairy vetch cover
crops
For detailed information about greenhouse structures, see
June-October: Sweet potato production
Greenhouse Engineering (NRAES-33), available from
October-April of Year 3: Triticale as cover crop
Cornell University Library, ecommons.cornell.edu .
Year 3
Transplant Containers
March: Terminate triticale cover crop
April-July: Cauliflower production
July-August: Buckwheat as cover crop
A wide variety of transplant containers are available, each
August-November: Lettuce or spinach production
with advantages and disadvantages. The most common ones
November-May of Year 4: Cereal rye as cover crop
are:
Year 4 • Styrofoam trays (e.g., Speedling)
March-May: Terminate cereal rye cover crop • Polystyrene or PVC flats or trays.
May-September: Pepper production • Peat strips, pots or pellets (e.g., Jiffy).
September-November: Mustard as cover crop
Peat pot containers have the advantage that the root system
need not be disturbed upon planting. Peat pots also are more
Year 5
forgiving of overwatering than other containers. If peat pots
Return to Year 1
are planted partially above ground, moisture is “wicked”
away from the plant, often resulting in plant death — peat
Transplant Production pellets do not have this disadvantage.
Polystyrene and Todd planter flats are both designed so that
Reviewed by Liz Maynard – Aug 2021 transplants must be “popped” out of the trays, thus disturbing
the root system. This is particularly true if the roots are
Transplant production has replaced direct seeding for many allowed to grow into the ground beneath the tray. Avoid this
vegetable crops. One of transplanting’s primary advantages is problem by raising the flats off the ground. Both the
earlier fruit production, allowing growers to capture better polystyrene and Todd planter flats must be watered with care.
market conditions. In addition, the high cost of hybrid seed Todd planter flats have a pyramidal design that forces roots
makes it desirable to use each seed as efficiently as possible. downward to an open bottom where the roots are air pruned.
Transplanting also gives the crops a competitive advantage Some polystyrene containers have open bottoms — tube
against weeds. This section addresses the special skills and types have open bottoms, groove types have small drainage
knowledge required for successful transplant production. holes.
Midwest Veg Guide 2022 23