)
I
S
G
(
8
A
I
D Geological Survey of India (GSI)
N
I
F
O
Introduction changing national priorities throughout successive Five
Y
Year Plans and are presently oriented in the light of the
E 8.1 The Geological Survey of India (GSI) was
V objectives and goals set for it in the XI Plan. The major
established in 1851 primarily with the objective of
R
thrust areas identified for GSI in the XI Plan are:
U locating mineral resources including coal. In the 150
S years since its inception, GSI has continued to grow • Creation and updation of national geoscientific
L and diversify into various geoscience activities, and has information and knowledge base through ground,
A
contributed immensely to Indian Geoscience. After marine and airborne surveys, with concept
C
I independence, GSI’s activities in mineral exploration oriented thematic geological mapping on
G
as well as baseline surveys have increased manifold in progressively larger scales and geochemical and
O
order to sustain the momentum of national economic geophysical mapping.
L
O development.
• Identification as well as preliminary assessment
E
G GSI’s activities may be grouped as ‘Geoscientific of the mineral resources.
baseline data’ which includes geological surveys and
• Geoscientific input to water resource
mapping; ‘Mineral Resource Assessments’ which
development, transport and miscellaneous civil
includes ferrous and nonferrous minerals, coal and
engineering projects.
lignite etc. ‘Special Studies’ which includes Natural
hazards studies, Climatic studies, Geotechnical studies • Natural hazard studies and disaster management
etc, and ‘Geoinformatics’ which include publication of including earthquake and landslide
Maps and Reports and generation of spatial information zonation studies.
through GIS and related software for a variety of • Shallow Subsurface Geology
applications in developmental and regulatory situation
• Geo-environmental investigations for both
as well in the commercial sphere.
regional and site specific studies.
Under the National Mineral Policy (NMP) 2008,
• Computerised archival, analyses, retrieval of
Geological Survey of India remains the principal agency
geoscientific data and creation of theme-based
for geological mapping and regional mineral resources
relational databases.
assessment of the country. The NMP seeks to ensure
that GSI programmes are prioritized in line with the • Dissemination of data through maps, publications,
national policy goals and are chalked out after taking customization, intranet/extranet f a c i l i t i e s
into account the exploration work undertaken by the through GSI portal etc.
private sector for which the existing arrangement of
• Training in specialised fields for upgradation of
programme formulation through the Central Geological
technology and expertise.
Programming Board (CGPB) would be revamped.
• Modernisation and expansion of laboratories and
NMP envisages strengthening the Geological Survey of
survey facilities.
India with manpower, equipment and upgraded skill sets.
Central Geological Programming Board
Thrust Areas of Activity
8.3 The Government set up the Central Geological
8.2 The thrust areas of GSI’s activities have evolved with
Programming Board (CGPB) by Government Resolution
54
Ministry of MinesGEOLOGICAL
SURVEY
OF
INDIA
(GSI)
in 1966 for formulation and implementation of the Central Board in respect of the respective sub-sector.
programmes in the earth- science area, with close During 2009-10 the 12 newly constituted Committees
coordination between GSI and State Geological of CGPB met for the first time and deliberated on
Departments and other central agencies. CGPB is relevant issues concerning the development of natural
supported by State level programming Boards and various resource before the 45th CGPB meeting held in
subcommittees formed for the development of various September 2009. The second meeting of the
mineral and geoscience based issues. While finalizing Committees took place in November – December 2009
the programmes of GSI, the Government policies and before the 46th CGPB meeting in February 2010. An
directives, suggestions and recommendations of Five Year important aspect of revamping was to energize the
Plan document, Sub-committees of the Central Geological State Geological Programming Boards (SGPB) and 19
Programming Board and State Geological Programming States have convened SGPB meetings during the year.
Boards are considered.
Restructuring of GSI
The Central Geological Programming Board (CGPB)
8.4 A High Powered Committee (HPC) was set up in
was revamped on 12th March, 2009 with three broad
January 2008 to thoroughly review the functioning of objectives viz., i) to effectively coordinate the different
Geological Survey of India and assess its capacity to meet
earth science related activities in the country, ii) to
the emerging challenges. The Committee submitted its
create geoscientific partnership through collaboration
report on 31st March 2009 and the recommendation
with various earth science organisations and State
have been accepted by the Government. The
Agencies and iii) to create a modern data dissemination
organizational structure, recommended by the HPC
mechanism through its Web Portal.
Committee and accepted by Government, is under
In accordance with the reconstitution, 12 Committees
implementation and is given in the Figuress 8.1 & 8.2.
for the various sub-sectors support CGPB and meet at
The strength / incumbency in Group ‘A’ post in various
least twice a year, to submit recommendations to the
streams is given in Table 8.1
Table 8.1
Statement Showing Strength / Incumbency In Group ‘A’ Posts in Various Streams in Geological Survey
of India (as on 1.1.2010)
JTS STS JAG SG SAG HAG Total
Stream
S F S F S F S F S F S F
Geology 1304 310 751 551 314 290 164 147 30 26 3 2 3892
Geophysics 237 113 118 35 51 18 26 19 4 4 625
Chemistry 234 107 61 23 30 17 14 12 3 3 504
Engineering 38 23 32 23 17 6 7 5 2 2 1 1 157
Personnel/
Administration 28 19 12 10 6 3 2 2 1 1 84
Finance 4 1 1 1 1 - 8
Stores 7 6 1 1 1 1 17
Library 1 - 1
Survey 2 - 2
Civil Engineering 1 - 1
Official Language 1 1 2
Law Officer 1 - 1
Vigilance 1 - 1 1 3
Total 1844 572 988 650 422 336 *214 *186 41 36 4 3 4896
55
Annual Report 2009-2010) Figure 8.1
I
S Geological Survery of India - Missions
G
(
A
I
D
N
I
F
O
Y
E
V
R
U
S
L
A
C
I
G
O
L
O
E
G
Figure 8.2
Organogram: Support Systems
56
Ministry of MinesGEOLOGICAL
SURVEY
OF
INDIA
(GSI)
The Director General (DG) as the operational head of resources, determine the relative priorities, and effect
the GSI has the overall responsibility of planning and executive and other controls on Divisions/Projects
execution of programmes of the organization. The DG, within the Regions/Wings. Each Region has a
GSI is supported by Additional Director General (ADG) headquarters unit for planning, finance and
/ Dy. Director Generals (DDG), in-charge of Missions administration. Operational units at State level, headed
and Support Systems. There are six Regions by a Deputy Director General, execute the programmes
(geographically based) for programme execution and in the field.
Additional Director General/Deputy Director General
GSI has its Central Headquarters in Kolkata and six
(HAG/SAG level) head each of these Regions and
Regional offices (geographically based) at Kolkata,
function as “Head of Department” (HOD) to oversee
Shillong, Lucknow, Jaipur, Nagpur and Hyderabad and
the formulation and implementation of annual
has State Units in almost all States as given below:
programmes, exercise budgetary control, allocate
Regions
State
Units
As recommended by the High Powered Committee, mode and the Field Season 2009-10 starting from
Geological Survey of India’s status was upgraded on 1.10.2009 is being conducted in this Mode.
14th July, 2009 and it is now formally an Attached office
• ‘Mission Offices’ have started functioning.
of the Ministry of Mines.
Support Systems are being revamped.
Status of Implementation of HPC Report
• For implementation of Enterprise Portal Project in
8.5 An Implementation Committee has been set up GSI, a Monitoring Committee under the
to go into the details for implementation of the HPC Chairmanship of Additional Secretary
report and for further follow up of its 74 main (Mines) was constituted on 2nd April, 2009 and
recommendations. The following is the status of progress of the Portal Project work is being closely
implementation of some of the main monitored. Completion Report of Phase I and
recommendations: Phase II is awaited. GSI is planning for Phase III in
collaboration with National Informatics Centre
• GSI has switched over to the Mission- Region
(NIC).
57
Annual Report 2009-2010) • Central Geological Programming Board (CGPB) were trained on G-1A Gravimeter in Toronto,
I
S and its Committees have been revamped and a Canada in the month of August, 2009]
G
new CGPB Secretariat has already started
(
• Proposal for acquisition of a new Geotechnical
A functioning from Delhi.
Vessel with shallow drilling capacity for GSI at a
I
D • The Ministry of Mines has issued orders on revised cost of Rs.70.20 crores has been finalized
N
5.6.2009 for dissemination of Geoscientific and procurement action initiated.
I
information gathered by GSI for use by public at
F
• Laboratory and IT equipment: In addition, GSI as
O large for free of cost. GSI has drawn an action
part of Modernisation has been purchasing
Y plan for digitizing and uploading all information
E laboratory and field equipment. A Modernization
legacy and larger scale maps.
V
Committee was set up in 2001 which made many
R
U • A Note for right sizing of GSI as per HPC Report significant recommendations in this regard and
S circulated to all concerned Ministries for the recommendations have been substantially
L comments before being submitted for Cabinet implemented except in respect of the following:-
A
approval.
C
(i) Palmtop computer, Digital camera and
I
G • Training Policy Coordination Committee (TPCC) Cellular phone for each field officer
O
has been set up under the chairmanship of
L (ii) Magnetic Gradiometry
O Secretary [Mines] to improve Training capabilities
E
and set up Regional Training Institutes. GSI has (iii) Gamma ray Spectrometry
G
started imparting training to officials of the State
(iv) Penetrometers
Governments in GSI’s Training Institutes free of
charge as recommended by the HPC.
(v) Transient EM sounding and profiling etc.
• A New Transfer Policy was approved for GSI with
A new Modernisation Committee has been constituted
effect from 01.01.2010.
on 30th June, 2009 to make further recommendations
keeping in view the HPC Report.
Modernisation
Performance of GSI during 2009-2010 at a
8.6 As part of the effort to meet emerging challenges
glance
GSI is constantly upgrading its technology both for field
as well as laboratory equipment.
8.7 The Scheme wise and percentage wise Plan
expenditure for the first three years of the XI Plan (till
The current status on procurement of the important
December 2009) is given in Annexure 8.1. Target vs.
capital assets is as under:
Achievement during the first three years (2007-10) of
• Procurement of a new ocean going research vessel XI Plan (2007-12) of the Geological Survey of India is
in replacement of GSI’s existing Research Vessel given in Annexure 8.2.
Samudra Manthan at a cost of Rs.448.00 crores
8.8 GSI has annual Field Season Programmes for
is underway.
various surveys and field investigations. After the
• Procurement of a Heliborne Geophysical Survey completion of the field duty and the subsequent
System for GSI at a cost of Rs.52.00 crores is laboratory work, the field party submits its report as a
almost complete. The integration of sensors with Progress Report. If a particular field item demands
the helicopter is to begin from March, 2010 with continuation of the same field assignment for further
trial flights and to be completed by May, 2012 survey and rock analysis, the field item is continued
for all the four sensors. [Eleven Officers of GSI and an Interim Report is submitted especially in the
58
Ministry of MinesGEOLOGICAL
SURVEY
OF
INDIA
(GSI)
case of Geochemical mapping, exploration for minerals, Specialised Thematic Mapping (STM)
etc. On completion of the full assignment including
8.11 GSI has launched specialized theme oriented
laboratory studies, a Final Report is submitted which
large-scale (1:25,000 or larger) studies/mapping items
marks the culmination of all geoscience activity on a
(Specialised Thematic Mapping) from VIII Plan period.
particular project/item. During the F.Y 2009-10 (upto
The studies involve application of multidisciplinary
December 2009) a total of 432 nos. of reports were
techniques, often complemented by precision
finalized and circulated. Lists of number of pending
laboratory studies. The outcome of these mapping
progress in the categories of Progress Report, Interim
efforts have already proven its importance in the areas
Report and Final Report in respect of geological
of prognostication of natural resources, environmental
(including mineral investigations) and geochemical
analysis, natural hazard recognition and risk
surveys/investigations are given in Annexure 8.3 and
management, land use management, evaluation of
8.4.
major civil engineering projects etc. An area of 3174
MISSION I: BASELINE GEOSCIENCE DATA sq.km has been covered by STM (during the year upto
GENERATION December 2009) raising the total coverage to
1,40,823.50 sq. km.
8.9 The Mission wise detailed programme are given
in the follow up paragraphs: Geophysical mapping
Systematic Geological Mapping 8.12 Systematic ground gravity - magnetic surveys
under the Geophysical Mapping Programme (GPM)
8.10 Systematic Geological Mapping on 1:50,000
has been initiated during X Plan Period and is being
scale, the most fundamental mapping programme,
continued in XI Plan Period. The mapping process
adopted by GSI in past decades generated the basic
involves acquisition of gravity and magnetic data with
data stream which catered to our National Geoscientific
an average station density of one station per 2.5 sq
Information and knowledge base. Out of the 3.146
km area for compilation of standardized gravity and
million sq. km mappable area, 3.09263 million sq. km
magnetic maps of the country on 1:50,000 scale. A
have so far been covered by systematic mapping,
total of 11 investigations were taken up by different
bringing the total coverage to 98.3%. An area of 130
Regions under the GPM programme during the year
sq. km has been covered by Systematic Geological
raising the total coverage to 1,26,663.30 sq. km.
Mapping in Mokokchung, Longleng and Tuensang
districts of Nagaland during 2009-10. Geochemical mapping
8.13 India’s National GeoChemical Mapping (NGCM)
Programme was initiated by GSI in 2001-02 with the
launching of a number of pilot surveys in different
States all over the country. The prime objective of this
endeavour is to produce a body of geochemical data
on 1:50,000 scale for the Indian landmass based
primarily on stream sediments, analyzed using
standardized set of methods. These data will compose
a complete, national-scale geochemical coverage of
the Indian land area, and will enable construction of
geochemical maps, refine estimates of baseline
concentrations of chemical elements in the sampled
media, and provide context for a wide variety of studies
Groove sampling of Metagabbro for PGE find
59
Annual Report 2009-2010) in the geological and environmental sciences. The RV Samudra Shaudhikama were carried out within TW
I
S extent of landmass of the country covered with hard off the West Coast of India. Surveys in the near shore
G
rock, soft rock and alluvial tracks is 3.28 million sq. km zone (0 to 10m isobath) are carried out using hired
(
A corresponding to 5065 toposheets. About 1,66,006 small-mechanized boats.
I sq km area encompassing 227 toposheets has been
D Geological Survey of India has completed seabed
N covered systematically under NGCM till date. An area
mapping of 19,75,364 sq km out of a total of
I of about 839 sq km is covered (up to December 2009).
20,14,900 sq. km within EEZ including TW and
F Geochemical Mapping especially in the mineral
O 1,27,046 Sq. km out of 1,50,000 Sq. km of TW till
prognosticated areas will be continued. A National
Y 2008-09. Beyond TW, coverage of EEZ is 18, 48,318
GCM database is being created centrally with the
E
sq km till FS 2008-09. During the Field Session (FS)
V intention of producing maps depicting geochemical
R 2008-09, swath bathymetry of 76,229 sq. km., 12,792
anomalies requiring detailed investigation for various
U
Lkm of bathymetry, 15,782 Lkm of magnetic
S purposes including mineral investigation.
parametric surveys were done within EEZ and 3105
L
A Airborne Mineral Survey sq. km. mapping was carried out within Territorial
C
Waters along with 377 sq. km. of swath bathymetry,
I 8.14 Airborne Geophysical Surveys are carried out by
G 1,605 Lkm of bathymetry, 114 Lkm of magnetic and
O the Twin Otter Airborne Survey System (TOASS) with
1,396 Lkm of shallow seismic parametric surveys.
L Magnetic and Gamma Ray Spectrometric Sensors
O
acquired by GSI in 1986. Since then (upto December, MISSION: II NATURAL RESOURCE ASSESSMENT
E
G 2009) a total of 4,76,162 line km over an area of
8.16 The Geological Survey of India (GSI) is vested
2,55,065 sq.km. was covered by deploying multi sensor
with the responsibility of maintaining broad based and
systems.
uniform national approach to data generation in respect
Aerogeophysical survey was carried out using multi of mineral resources to cater to the demand of the
sensors over 24,101 line km (12,857 line km in Kanker nation for providing reliable information on mineral
area, Bastar Craton, Chhattisgarh; 11,244 line km in and other natural resources to the public and private
Mauranipur-Sarila, M.P. – U.P. border area) covering entrepreneurs. Systematic updating of the database of
an area of 12050 sq km (6,428 sq.km. in Kanker area the survey in the mineral sector is being continued.
and 5,622 sq.km in Mauranipur-Sarila area) during the From Field Season 2009-10, the resource evaluation
Field Season 2008 – 09. will be made totally under UNFC three digit code
system (economic, feasibility and geological axes) in
As part of the modernization programme, GSI has
accordance with the requirement of the National
recently procured one helicopter with state-of-the-art
Mineral Policy 2008.
TM domain, EM system fitted on a heliborne platform
along with the latest magnetic, spectrometric and For the Field Season 2009-10, a total of 92 items
gravity heliborne geophysical survey systems. (excluding three offshore mineral investigations) are
included, of which 69 are under ‘Mineral resource
Marine and Coastal Surveys
assessment’ (ores and minerals) and 23 belong to
8.15 Geological Survey of India carried out offshore ‘Natural energy resources’ i.e. [coal and lignite].
geoscientific studies both in Exclusive Economic Zone
Among these 69 projects under Mineral Resource
(EEZ) and Territorial Waters (TW) along the East and
Assessment, 11 are for Ferrous Minerals (Iron,
West Coasts of India. Five cruises were mounted
Manganese, Chromite), 22 for Precious Metals &
onboard RV Samudra Manthan within EEZ. Six cruises
Minerals (12 for Gold, 7 for PGE, 3 for Diamond), 24
were launched onboard RV Samudra Kaustubh within
for Non-Ferrous and Strategic Minerals (21 Base metal,
TW off the East Coast of India. Seven cruises onboard
60
Ministry of MinesGEOLOGICAL
SURVEY
OF
INDIA
(GSI)
3 Molybdenum) and 12 for Industrial & Fertilizer total strike length of the iron ore body is about
Minerals. 1.95 km with a surface width varying from 40m
to 250m. Based on the analytical results the iron
The programming of energy resources [coal and lignite]
ore resource has been estimated at 9.1million
has been designed in tune with the XI Plan proposal
tonnes at 55% Fe cut off.
approved by the Planning Commission, Government
guidelines issued from time to time and the Manganese
recommendation of the CGPB Committee Group V
• Exploration for manganese in Bolani block, Orissa
(Energy Minerals). Planning and finalization was based
resulted in re-estimation of the resource to 0.66mt
keeping in view the key factors i.e., (i) locating power
at 20% Mn cut off with an average grade of
grade coal at shallow depth, (ii) proving of superior
25.52% Mn corresponding mostly to G-2 stage
quality including coking coal, (iii) identifying new areas
of exploration in UNFC system. Thus 0.01 million
in deeper unexplored part of the basins or as an
tonne has been added to resources. Damurda
extension of explored blocks/existing mines, (iv)
Block of Bonai-Kendujhar Belt, Kendujhar district,
establishing additional resources of lignite from power
Orissa has been explored and a tentative resource
hungry southern and western states and (v) assessment
from northern part of Damurda (North) block has
of CBM potentiality in green field areas of selected
been estimated at 0.94million tonnes at 20% Mn
coal/lignite basins. GSI has formulated a total of 23
cut-off.
coal – lignite exploration items, out of which 19 items
fall in CIL, 1 item in SCCL and 3 items in Lignite bearing
Basemetal
areas (out of 23, 10 nos. are of promotional nature).
• A low grade copper mineralized zone has been
Out of these 69 mineral investigations, 18
established for a strike length of 600m (0.35%
investigations (excluding two of Kerala on sand in
Cu X 13.83m) and for 400m (0.18% Cu X 6.25m)
offshore and onshore) are through State requests/
at two different sectors at Gangutana,
collaborations.
Mahendragarh district, Haryana. A resource of
Mineral search and assessment is undertaken with 2.128 million tonnes at 0.4% Cu have been
special emphasis on deficient commodity of high value estimated over a strike length of 800m and vertical
(e.g. gold, diamond, PGE etc.), strategic minerals depth of 100m towards north of Gangutana. The
(molybdenum, tungsten), fertilizer mineral stage of exploration corresponds to UNFC system-
(phosphorite and potash) as well as ores and minerals G3.
of high demand (basemetal, ferrous minerals, coal,
Strategic Minerals
lignite, limestone etc.). A total of 568.75 sq. km. large
scale mapping, 19.725 sq.km. detailed mapping and • In Tamil Nadu a concept-oriented exploration for
43,004.44 m drilling were done under Mission II (upto
molybdenum was taken up in Velampatti South
December ’09).
Block, Harur-Uttangarai Belt, Dharmapuri district
to test the strike extension, depth persistence and
Mineral Resource Assessment
potentials of the hitherto unexplored footwall
8.17 Some of the important findings under Mineral shear zone. With the help of three boreholes, it
Resource Assessment during the year FS 2008-09 are has been interpreted that a number of
enumerated below: molybdenum bearing quartz veins are confined
to a zone of shearing and are much wider than
Iron Ore
conceived earlier. Investigation will be continued
• Exploration for iron ore in Ghoraburhani-Sagasahi during F.S. 2009-10 to establish the geometry of
area, Sundargarh district Orissa, indicates that the the deep level shear zone, its relation with the
61
Annual Report 2009-2010) shallow level shear zone and the geometry of the spinel has also been recorded from Kalwakurthi
I
S lodes within the shear zone. and Charakunda block in Mahbubnagar and
G
Nalgonda districts.
( Gold
A
Platinoid Group of Elements (PGE)
I • Bedrock samples in Ajjanahalli Block-C, Tumkur
D
district, Karnataka yielded gold value ranging from • In Mettupalaiyam Ultramafic Complex, Tamil
N
I 0.10 g/t to 4.22 g/t. Analysis of trench samples Nadu the average width and grade of the PGE
F indicated gold value ranging from 0.36 g/t to 6.0 bearing zone is 3.50m with Pt value ranging from
O
g/t. In Ajjanahalli block-F, three major auriferous 42 to 601 ppb and Pd from 92 to 1575 ppb. A
Y BIF bands have been delineated. Band-I (strike mineralized zone with high value of PGE (277 ppb
E
V length 300m average width 3 to 4m) has recorded Pt and 698 ppb Pd) has been traced for about
R 1.02 to 2.2 g/t gold; Band-II (strike length 200m 100m in Mallanayakapuram area.
U
average width of 2m) has recorded 0.28 to 1.70
S • In Chettiampalaiyam block of Sittampundi Layered
g/t gold; Band III (strike length of 700m average
L Complex, Tamil Nadu PGE mineralization with
A width 4m) has recorded gold values from 0.03 to
average grade of 0.91 ppm Pt + 0.77ppm Pd (for
C
0.70g/t.
I a width of 1.55m) and 1.76 ppm Pt + 1.72ppm
G
O • On the basis of analytical result a resource of Pd (for a width of 1.80m) was recorded. PGE
L 22.97million tonnes of gold ore with 1.81 g/t Au mineralized zone with 1.62 ppm Pt + 0.31ppm
O
has been estimated in Delwara West block, Pd was traced for 300m.
E
G Rajasthan. The total gold resource of Bhukia gold
• In Maharashtra, samples of pyroxenite from Heti
prospect has been augmented from 60.58million
area have analyzed 35-95 ppb Pd, 11-78 ppb Pt.
tonnes to 83.55 million tonnes with an average
Fertiliser Minerals
grade of 1.87g/t Au. The stage of exploration
corresponds to G-3 of UNFC system. • In West Bengal an investigation for apatite and
associated minerals was taken up in Panrkidih and
• A tentative resource of 0.053 million tonnes gold
Cholwari area, Purulia district during the F.S. 2008-
ore with an average grade of 3.03 g/t Au has
09. In Belaidih block, a 130m strike length of the
been estimated in the Proterozoic rocks of
mineralized body has been established with over
Sonapahari area, Sonbhadra district, Uttar
20%P O . In Chholari block two isolated patches
Pradesh. The stage of exploration corresponds to
2 5
of mineralized body were recorded at 300m apart.
G-3 of UNFC system.
Limestone
• Investigation for gold mineralization in Sonadehi
gold prospect Chhattisgarh, revealed a resource • In Rajasthan, exploration for limestone was taken
of 2.28 million tonnes with 0.699 g/t gold. The up in Minyun Ki Dhani block, Jaisalmer district.
stage of exploration corresponds to G-3 of UNFC The boreholes intersected hard and massive SMS-
system. grade limestone bands belonging to Khuiala
Formation (Eocene/ Tertiary) whose thickness
Diamond
ranges between 0.24m and 7.50m.
• Search for kimberlite in Buthpur and Achampet
block in Mahbubnagar district, Andhra Pradesh, Natural Energy Resources
yielded kimberlite specific minerals like picro-
Coal & Lignite
ilmenite and chrome-spinel in stream sediment
samples from Palkampally, Wattipalli and 8.18 An additional resource of 1638.52 million tonnes
Kottapalli. Kimberlite specific minerals like chrome of coal and 0.19 million tonne of lignite has been
62
Ministry of MinesGEOLOGICAL
SURVEY
OF
INDIA
(GSI)
assessed from the data generated from regional learning. Both the components of the Project are to
exploration by GSI. The geological resources of Coal be implemented concurrently with simultaneous
of the country stand at 267.21 billion tonnes and that creation of databases for administrative and scientific
of lignite at 39.07 billion tonnes as on 01.04.2009. domains. The network will facilitate i) Faster interaction
among the earth scientists for sharing of knowledge
Coal Bed Methane
and experience for effective and timely solution of
various problems and ii) Initiation of web-centric
CBM study for determination of in-situ gas content
database for concurrent input and output of data in
has been carried out under promotional scheme in
customized formats at a faster rate, which will be
seven boreholes (Rajmahal, Birbhum, Ramkola-
available to users as per their need and authentication.
Tatapani, Talchir, Sohagpur Coalfields and Tamil Nadu
The SFC on “The proposal of Network & Portal in
Lignite Fields) and is presently continuing in two
Geological Survey of India” was held on 11.08.03. The
boreholes in Birbhum and Mand-Raigarh coalfields. Gas
project was to be completed in two Phases. Phase-I
desorption studies show very incipient gas content
was to be completed by March 2004 at a total cost of
(<1.0cc/gm) in all the Coal/Lignite fields except
Rs.12.2 crores and Phase-II to be completed by March
Sohagpur Coafield (around 2.0cc/gm), which may be
2005 at a total cost of Rs.12.80 crores.
attributed to higher thermal maturity of the coal. The
adsorption studies conducted so far (Rajmahal, Phase – III: Future Plans
Ramkola-Tatapani coalfields and Tamil Nadu Lignite
GSI aims to enhance access to and delivery of services
Field) indicate that the seams are highly undersaturated
to benefit the public in general, and the stakeholders
in methane.
in particular. More importantly, it aims to help
MISSION: III GEOINFORMATICS strengthen government’s drive toward effective
governance and increased transparency to better
GSI Portal Project
manage the country’s natural resources for
8.19 Geoscientific database building activity in GSI development. The next step would be to enhance the
has gained a new impetus with the implementation of access to and delivery of services and information to
Enterprise GIS, which is a significant part of the GSI benefit the public (G2C), other government agencies
Portal Project. Enterprise GIS envisages a centralized (G2G), business partners (G2B) and employees (G2E).
repository (spatial data warehouse - SDW) of unified GSI with its large volume of data encompassing more
and coordinated spatial data resources providing than 30000 unpublished reports (largely text
secured, authorized access to all users. Enterprise GIS information with tabular data, maps, images and
components such as Load & Update system, Inquiry diagrams), over 750 publications, published maps and
system are implemented. numerous other documents which gets generated
everyday through regular office processes intends to
Phase – I&II
use a system which would enable it to electronically
The GSI Portal project will have two active components store, archive, organize, index and file documents, such
that they can be retrieved anytime, anywhere, without
– (i) Building a Network infrastructure, connecting
any loss of time.
different offices of Geological Survey of India, which
include Central Headquarters, Regional Headquarters,
Data accretion and publication on Portal
Wings and Operation Units & creating a LAN and
WAN, and (ii) creation of a portal capable of hosting 8.20 Documents (both text and graphic) generated and
corporate data, disseminate public domain data to circulated by GSI are basically of two types: (a) printed
common mass, support e-business and promote e- and published material for sale as well as for free
63
Annual Report 2009-2010) distribution and (b) unpublished documents for of GSI have been uploaded, and 1069 nos. of full
I
S circulation within GSI and also for sale after costing on reports published after 2004 have been accommodated
G
case to case basis for bonafide users. The Policy in this in the GSI Portal for consultation and downloading as
(
A regard has been modified under direction of the per the new dissemination policy of the Government.
I Ministry on 5.6.2009 and will henceforth be as given Besides above, the portal is populated with large
D
N in Annexure 8.5. number of case studies, DIDs and photographs of
I general interest.
8.21 Geological maps on 1:50K scale were compiled
F
O at regional level and with an objective to prepare 8.24 The all India earthquake database is being
Y seamless geological map of India. The digitized updated incorporating 6111 events of 2005 from ISC
E
geological layer of 1:50K maps are being uploaded in bulletin. A total of 28278 events occurring within the
V
R the Portal. A total of 3065 maps on 1 : 50K scale have territory covered by latitude 0°-37°N and longitude 68°-
U
been uploaded in the portal till December, 2009. Out 98°E have been incorporated in the database.
S
of 334 sheets of Geological Quadrangle Maps
L Laboratory data:
A amenable to compilation and dissemination, 292 have
C been published till date. Geological and Mineral Map 8.25 Vast volume of data is being generated by analysis
I
G of States (Scale 1:2M), describing the geology and of samples collected through National Geochemical
O
mineral resources of 30 different states of India Regions Mapping programme. A step has been taken to
L
O are updated regularly. The Geological and Mineral Map systematically archive this voluminous geochemical
E of Assam and Geological and Mineral Map of data. Accordingly, toposheet-wise database is being
G
Meghalaya were scrutinized for updation. Spatial built on database compatible format which will be
database with relevant attribute information have been integrated with GSI Portal in due course.
built during the period with an aim to add two new
On line Library
layers for the existing 1:2 M map service. These
include information on meteorites fall in Indian sub-
8.26 As a part of GSI Portal, LIBSYS - the web-
continent and age data of the Indian rocks. Seven
compatible network version of Library Management
District Resource Maps of Eastern Region and one
software - started functioning. Up to July, 2009, 234
map of Southern Region have been published during
publication related data could be entered. Database
the period. Compilation of geological and geophysical
on 800 GSI publications have been edited and 409 of
data on a Territorial Water map of Bay of Bengal has
these have been entered into TEXTO software towards
been taken up. In view of the growing demand of
metadata preparation for soft copy conversion of GSI
users in the fields of urban planning, water resource
publications. Metadata of 3022 articles from 326
development, environmental hazard and neotectonic
volumes including 185 parts, have been compiled. 175
studies, compilation of Quaternary Geological Atlas
International Maps have been scanned for soft copy
of India was taken up in 2003 and is continuing. About
conversion.
802 nos. of various published geological maps
uploaded in Portal. Creation of Geophysical data repository
8.22 The uploading of Legacy Field Season Programme 8.27 Creation of geophysical data repository involves
data and extended abstract of the programmes designing and development of data format, data
completed till date since 1986 was initiated in July 2009 standard, data dissemination, data storage, data
and till date about 5046 items have been put in the processing and development of data delivery products
GSI portal for public viewing. like digital data, digital maps on different scales and
dissemination of various technical reports together with
8.23 The metadata of about 30,880 nos. of reports
in-house expertise. The in-house work has been
64
Ministry of MinesGEOLOGICAL
SURVEY
OF
INDIA
(GSI)
initiated for developing standards, formats etc. geophysical sensors has been initiated by GSI. The
Procurement of computer hardware like server, expenditure incurred on this item in F.Y. 2009-10
network and development of customized software for is of the order of 487.22 lakhs.
data inputs, data manipulation and delivery of data
Geotechnical Investigations
products for which actions have been initiated.
• Thirty three items of geotechnical and engineering
MISSION: IV FUNDAMENTAL AND
geological studies through 190 investigations
MULTIDISCIPLINARY GEOSCIENCES AND
were undertaken related to civil engineering
SPECIAL STUDIES
projects for water resource development,
8.28 An additional amount of Rs. 15.00 crores was communication and miscellaneous projects in
announced in the budget, 2009-10 : almost all the states of the country as well as in
neighboring countries
Three projects have been identified which are
mentioned below:- Seismic/Earthquake Geology
1. Geomorphological Mapping on 1:50000 scale– • Five items of active fault mapping and three items
GSI along with Indian Space Research of seismic microzonation were undertaken in
Organisation (ISRO) has taken up addition to other earthquake related studies.
Geomorphological mapping of the entire country
• The Seismic observatories of GSI in Jabalpur,
on 1: 50K scale using Remote Sensing Techniques
Nagpur etc are continuously recording global,
and limited field checks. The project is to be
regional and local seismic events and monthly /
completed by 2012. Expenditure incurred on
quarterly data has been published and distributed
these items in F.Y. 2009-10 is of the order of Rs.
regularly.
10.66 lakhs.
• The permanent GPS station at Lucknow
2. 1:50000 scale Map Service on Internet – GSI in
(established by DST) is engaged in round the clock
collaboration with National Informatics Center is
monitoring of GPS data. The data was supplied
exploring the prospects of using open source
regularly to National GPS Data Centre, Survey of
software and open GIS platform for creating map
India, Dehradun for further processing/
service on internet. GSI has initiated finalization
interpretation.
of geological map layer in National Grid and
uploading with attribute data in geodata base for Landslide Hazard Studies
intranet viewing and has uploaded around about
• Geological Survey of India has been declared as
2000 toposheets as a back-end support. An
the Nodal Agency for Landslide Investigation in
expenditure of Rs. 18.51 lakhs has been incurred
the country and to develop a comprehensive
on it in F.Y. 2009-10.
strategy for the effective mitigation of Landslide
3. Creation of Geophysical Data Repository and Hazards in landslide prone areas. A new guideline
acquisition of geophysical sensors – GSI has released by Government of India lays emphasis
initiated in-house work for developing standards, on preparedness, capacity building and awareness
formats, etc. It feels that services of a consultant generation. This guideline will be implemented
is required for identifying the need for through a Detailed Project Report (DPR), which
procurement of computer hardware like server, is under preparation.
network and development of customized software
• GSI has undertaken 20 programmes of landslide
for data inputs, data manipulation and delivery
investigation in the landslide prone hilly terrain.
of data products. Procurement action for
65
Annual Report 2009-2010) A total of 2,195 sq km by Landslide Hazard Glaciological Studies
I
S Zonation and 572 Line kilometer road corridors
G • Glacio-geomorphological mapping covering an
have been covered on Macro Scale (1:25,000/
(
area of 0.50 sq km has been undertaken on the
A 50.000) during F.S. 2008 - 09.
both the banks of melt water stream of the
I
D • Eleven townships have been covered by Landslide Hamtah glacier, Lahul – Spiti district, H.P.
N
Hazard Zonation on Meso Scale (1:5000/10,000) Monitoring of glacier snout on 1:5000 scale has
I
to assess the stability status of the existing thickly shown that the glacier has vacated an area of
F
O populated townships/important civil engineering 0.006 km2 since 2007. During the last eight years
Y structure etc. in the landslide prone hilly terrain. 2000 – 08, the glacier has vacated an area of
E
0.0346 km2 with an average being 0.0043 km2/
V
• Landslide Inventory has been taken up for all old
R year.
U and fresh landslides for their documentation
S throughout the country. Detailed site-specific Antarctic Studies
L studies of three landslides have been carried out.
A • GSI has been continuing with its Antarctic studies
C
Environment Geology programme and till date more than 19000 sq km
I
G area has been mapped with the help of ground
O • Regional Geoenvironmental impact assessment of
traverses. During the 28th expedition (2008-09)
L limestone mines and cement plants in Chittorgarh;
O two geologists of GSI have mapped around 250
E Sirohi, Pali, Jodhpur and Nagaur districts,
sq km area in the Gjelsvikfjella region using the
G Rajasthan and formulation of effective
Norwegian station TROLL as base.
environmental management plans,
Geoenvironmental appraisal in parts of Sohagpur • Monitoring of the snout of “Dakshin Gangotri
Coalfied, Annupur and Shahdol Districts, MP - Glacier” overriding the southern edge of
Surguja District, Chhattisgarh and Geo- Schirmacher Oasis has shown a consistent
environmental impact on rapid urbanization of recession (1.09 m during 2008-2009) which has
Berhampore – Murshidabad townships and their been partly attributed to changes in the global
environs in West Bengal were taken up. climate pattern. During the same period the drift
snow accumulation over the shelf has been
Medical Geology (Bio- & Chemical Geohazards)
recorded as 89.5 cm. GSI started drilling for
• Study of incidence of arsenic in groundwater in retrieving ice cores to study the palaeoclimate of
parts of Saran and Vaishali districts, Bihar reveals
that the older alluvium surface appears to be free
from hazardous incidence of arsenic in
groundwater while the younger alluvium (older/
present flood plain) show hazardous incidence of
As ranging from 50 ppb to >500 ppb in ground
water with reports of varied forms of skin diseases
in local population.
• Development of a mitigation strategy to manage
risk from arsenic toxicity in groundwater of West
Bengal, India was continued in collaboration with
NR-Can, Geological Survey of Canada.
GSI Field team at Antarctica
66
Ministry of MinesGEOLOGICAL
SURVEY
OF
INDIA
(GSI)
the area and embarked on the study of sediments petrology, climatic change and responses of
from the lake bottoms of Antarctic lakes and GPR environment system, studies on geological health
studies to draw profiles of lakes as well as to hazard and remedies etc are continued.
determine the ice-land-ice-sea interface. Using
• The study of the geological and geomorphological
MLF antenna of 35 MHz frequency, a depth of
determinants of the characteristics of present day
up to 400 m has been reached in profiling.
beaches in Andaman Island for coastal
• India’s third research station has been planned to management identified that both the sea and
be established at Larsemann Hills region, Prydz hinterland are the possible source of stress on the
Bay area of East Antarctica. GSI started mapping target beaches. The Betapur beach in Middle
of the new site and a geological map has been Andaman appears to be vulnerable in respect of
prepared for a portion of the area around the new effects of sea induced stress. Corbyn’s Cove beach
station site. of South Andaman and Wandoor beach close to
Port Blair are more susceptible to stress from
Arctic Studies
hinterland due to man induced process.
• To continue the studies carried out in previous
• Palaeontological and palaeobiological studies for
expeditions, the Third Arctic Expedition launched
stratigraphic correlation and records of climate
from 16th June 2009 to 18th July 2009. In view
change revealed that there has been a three fold
of the heavy snow cover on Vestre Broggerbreen
glacier, and several melt water channels in the increase in low salinity indicator planktonic
proglacial region, glacier remained foraminifera suggesting increased monsoonal
unapproachable. Field work was restricted to precipitation and increased runoff from Ganga-
density profiling of snow cover sections and Brahmaputra river system diluting the salinity of
geomorphological mapping in the proglacial surface layer water in the central Bay of Bengal.
region using handheld GPS. Mapping of the snout
• Precise dating of the geological samples has been
of glacier revealed marginal recession as compared
to August 2008. During the period, five snow and undertaken at the Geochronology and Isotope
melt water samples collected for trace elements. Geology Division. Regression of strontium isotopic
In addition, two samples were collected from data of six whole rock samples of Chinnapendekallu
terminal moraine –I and II for T.L./O.S.L. dating. granite, Andhra Pradesh yielded a Rb–Sr whole rock
The team also tested their ice-drilling machine isochron age of 2364Ma.
using gasoline for fixation of stakes.
• Radiocarbon dating of Shell samples from Gujarat
8.29 Laboratory Studies, Research and Development revealed an age of 29,609 ± 320 Ybp.
• GSI laboratories have been upgraded with state-
of-the-art instrumental facilities. Intensive
laboratory studies are being carried out to
generate precise analytical database to support
the field investigations. Input from Electron Probe
Micro Analyses, Fluid inclusion study, Optically
Stimulated Luminescence (OSL) dating etc. has
been widely and effectively used in different
research projects.
• Basic petrological researches on crustal evolution,
The GSI research vessel RV Samudra Manthan in the Andaman
metallogeny, volcanism, evolution of sedimentary
sea; in the back ground is Barren Volcano
basins through time and space, experimental
67
Annual Report 2009-2010) Museum: that in addition to the Training Advisory Committee of
I
S GSI, there should be a Training Policy Coordination
G The Indian Museum has four galleries dedicated to
( Committee (TPCC) chaired by the Secretary (Mines).
Geology namely: Siwalik Gallery, Earth & Meteorite
A A Committee was formed to meet at least once a year
I Gallery, Rock & Mineral Gallery and the Invertebrate
to review training activities of Training Mission, approve
D
Fossil gallery since 1875. As a part of setting up of a
N policy and strategy initiatives. The Committee met for
I state-of-the-art Earth & Meteorite Gallery, an initiative
the first time on 10.9.2009 and again on 23.12.2009,
F has been taken up to restore the antique showcases of
O and has been giving policy and strategic direction to
the Indian Museum 200th anniversary (2014)
GSI in revamping the training infrastructure.
Y
E Celebrations of the Museum.
V Human Resource Development
R • Provided information on earth science and of the
U department’s activity Curatorial Division has put Since its inception in 1976, the GSITI has conducted
S
up 8 major Earth Science Exhibitions with 666 training programmes (up to 31st July, 2009) and
L
A preparation of pavilion model, planning of pavilion trained 14,078 geoscientists of GSI, other earth science
C organizations and universities of the country and also
setup, ordering the displays, designing
I
G geoscientists from ESCAP and SAARC countries. The
presentations etc. Audio visual presentations were
O
training programmes are focused on fundamentals and
L also prepared through divisional resources and
O applied aspects of geosciences viz. Geology,
presented through LCD TV.
E Geophysics, Chemistry, Mineral Investigation, Natural
G
• A data base on the Fossil Repository is available
Hazards, Remote Sensing, Drilling and Surveying. The
online with 756 nos. of GSI collection along with
Institute regularly conducts DST (Department of
modification of more than 250 old records. Science & Technology) supported programmes, ISRO
(Department of Space) supported Remote Sensing
MISSION: V TRAINING AND CAPACITY
(NNRMS) programmes, customized courses for other
BUILDING
agencies and administrative courses for the
Training Policy Coordination Committee
departmental personnel.
8.30 The High Powered Committee recognized that
GSI Training Institute is providing high quality cutting
training activity needs to be vastly expanded to cover
edge training /knowledge with state-of-the-art
all the stakeholders, organizations and recommended
facilities. The TI would conduct induction level Courses
for GSI scientists, specialized courses, International
courses and Training of Trainers (TOT) courses for
Regional Training Centres and State Institutes. The
Institute has embarked on programmes of capacity
building in the field of geosciences to raise the technical
ability of departmental candidates, students, research
scholars, faculty from Universities and officers of
various State Governments and private sector
departments. GSITI conducted orientation course for
geologists, 10 scientific courses, 6 technical courses,
11 administrative courses and 2 sponsored courses.
Five programmes have been undertaken as outside FSP
Newly Recruited Geologist with Mr. Vijay Kumar, Special
Secretary (Mines) near the Field Training Centre, programme.
Zawar (Rajasthan)
68
Ministry of MinesGEOLOGICAL
SURVEY
OF
INDIA
(GSI)
The HPC recommended creation of Regional Training Regional Training Institutes forming part of the Regions
Institutes (RTI), one each at the Regional Headquarters will have Field Training Centres (FTCs) specializing in a
of Geological Survey of India except at Southern particular geologic domain. Accordingly, order was
Region, (the training needs of Southern Region will be issued December, 2009 creating Regional Training
looked after by GSITI, Hyderabad), under GSITI to Institutes as follows:
function in a hybrid matrix system of Administration.
Sl. No. Regional Training Institute Specialisations
1 GSI Regional Training Institute – SR Petrology, Remote sensing, Geoinformatics, Geophysics, Rock
Mechanics, Geotechnical Studies
2 GSI Regional Training Institute – NR Glaciology, Engineering Geology Himalayan Geology, Siwalik
Mapping, Seismotectonics and Earthquake Engineering, Quaternary
Geology, Landslide and Landslide Hazard studies, Active Fault Mapping
3 GSI Regional Training Institute – WR Desert Geology, Exploration Techniques, Ore Deposit modeling &
evaluation, Geochemical exploration, Archaean/ Proterozoic Terrain
Mapping
4 GSI Regional Training Institute – CR Deccan Traps, Drilling techniques, Geo-archaeological studies,
Photogeology & Remote sensing studies, Medical Geology,
Quaternary Geology, Geomorphology and landuse
5 GSI Regional Training Institute– ER Sedimentary basin analysis, Gondwana Geology, Mapping techniques
in Coal field areas, Coal exploration, Coal petrography, Coastal &
near shore processes
6 GSI Regional Training Institute – NER Mapping techniques for Tertiary rocks, Neotectonics, Landslide &
Landslike Hazard studies, Geo-environmental & Fragile ecological
studies
The Field Training Centres attached to the Regional Training Institutes (RTI) are as follows:
Sr.No RTI Field Training Centre Specialization
1 RTI- SR Hyderabad 1) Chitradurga,2) Kothagudem* Mapp