CHAPTER- 9
HORTICULTURE
9.1 India's diverse climate ensures availability of all varieties of fresh fruits & vegetables
India is one of the potential suppliers in the global organic market. Various categories of organic
food products are exported under NPOP and NOP certification. India has witnessed voluminous
increase in horticulture production over the last few years. Significant progress has been made in
area expansion resulting in higher production. Apart from the health improvements, the
production of vegetables improves the economy of a country as these are very good source of
income and employment. The scenario of horticultural crops in India has become very
encouraging. Th e percentage share of horticulture output in agriculture has become more than
30%. Under the purview of agriculture and allied activities, the share of plan outlay for
horticulture which was 3.9% during Ninth Five Year Plan, has increased to 4.6% during the
Twelfth Plan.
9.2 It is a matter of satisfaction, we are second largest producer of vegetables and fruits and
our presence in global market is significant . The different types of fruits are exported to the
outside world. The development achieved in the horticulture sector is indicative of the fact that
there is growing demand for horticulture produce. The past experience have been rewarding for
enhanced output from the investment. Availability of timely robust information in this sector will
certainly improve the socioeconomic conditions of Indian citizens by providing self-reliance
besides environmental protection. India is one of the potential suppliers in the global organic
market. Various categories of organic food products are exported under NPOP and NOP
certification. India has retained its status as the second largest producer of fruits in the world.
The country is first in the production of fruits like mango, banana, sapota, pomegranate and
anole. Vegetables are an important crop in horticulture sector.
9.3 Potentialities exist for cultivation of flowering plants. In addition to the beautification of
the local landscape, great scope exists for export of flowers; and floriculture is important for
bee-keeping industry which too provides an alternate source of income to the Indian farmers.
9.4 Government Initiatives: Keeping in view the importance of Horticulture sector, the
Government of India has launched a centrally sponsored scheme called the National
Horticulture Mission (NHM) in 2005-06. The objectives of the Mission were to enhance
Horticulture production and improve Nutritional security and income support to farm households
and others through area based regionally differentiated strategies. Crops such as fruits, spices,
flowers, medicinal and aromatic plants, plantation crops of cashew and cocoa were included for
area expansion whereas vegetables were covered through seed production cultivation, integrated
Nutrient management, integrated pest management and organic farming.
9.5 Various Institutes like Indian Agricultural Research Institute (IARI), Horticulture
Wing in Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR), Indian Institute for Horticulture
Research, Bangalore, Agricultural universities etc have been continuously striving to improve
the quality of the horticultural products as well as to increase their productivity.9.6 Challenges before Horticulture Sector : The horticulture sector in India is
characterized by small, segregated farms with low per-hectare yields and huge post-harvest
losses, owing to outdated practices. Government is also taking steps to reduce food processing
bottlenecks by augmenting processing and storage capabilities and making finance available.
9.7 Sources of Horticulture Data: Various components of Horticulture are dealt by
different Departments/ Ministries. Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers
Welfare, Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare brings out District wise production
data for horticulture crops besides a Publication called Handbook of Horticulture Statistics.
The National Horticulture Board (NHB) compiles and publishes annual data base for
horticulture sector ( National Horticulture Database) in respect of all the states and the crops.
The publication contains data on exports of horticulture produce besides production area ,
production and yield of horticulture crops.Various Boards like Rubber Board, Coffeee Board
etc compile their own statistics.Food & Agriculture Organization (FAO) maintains the
information on area under cultivation of horticultural products, production & productivity for
various countries in the world.
Name of Chapter : Horticulture
List of Tables
Sr. No. of
No. Table Name of Table
1 9.1 Area and Production Estimates of Horticulture Crops - Summary
2 9.2 (A) Area and Production of Various Horticulture Crops - All India
3 9.2 (B) Area and Production of Various Horticulture Crops - State-wise
4 9.3 Area and Production of Flowers - State-wise
5 9.4 Area, Production and Productivity of Various Kinds of Spices
6 9.5 Area and Production of Fruits
7 9.6 Area and Production of Vegetables
8 9.7 Area and Production of Plantations - State-wise
9 9.8 Export of Horticulture Produce in India
10 9.9 Major Fruits and Vegetables Producing countries in the World